=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
TOP SECRET, 25X1 'NF 
Event Interview of George Tenet 
Type of Event: Interview 
Dace: January 22, 2004 . X25 1Special Access lssues: Treat as TOP S.ECll£T,· 
Additional notes: Jhc witness was under oath 
Prepared by: Gordon Lederman and Alexis Albion 
Reviewed by: Mike Hurley 
Team Number: rwo and Three 
Location: DCI Conference Room, CIA HQs 
Participants - Non-Commission: George Tenet, CIA Chief of Staff John Moseman, ClA 
General Counsel Scott Muller, Rudy Rousseau, Ben Bonk, 2,SXt ,- • -iand 
the DCI's assistant25X1. • • 
Participants - Commission: Commissioner Richard Ben-Veniste, Commissioner Tim Roemer, 
Philip Zelikow, Chris Kojm, Ernest May, Dan Marcus~ Mike Hurley, Alexis Albion, Gordon 
Lederman 
(U) Commissioner Roemer administered the oath to DCI Tenet at the start of the interview. 
Background 
(U) Tenet served as Staff Director of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence (SSCI), and as 
Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for Intelligence Programs at the National 
Security Council (NSC) before taking the position of Deputy Director of Central Intelligence 
(DDCI) in July 1995. In December 1996, he became Acting DCI. Since July 11, 1997, Tenet 
has served as DCI. 
Understanding the Threat 
(U) Zelikow asked how Tenet's perceptions of the terrorist threat changed when he became DCI. 
Tenet responded with what essentially constituted an opening statement. [Tenet said tht1t he 
would p,-ovide the Commission with the detailed limeline to which he was referrctf1. 
~.JBL came to the forefront when Tenet was DDCI. In 1996, ·CIA created an issue station 
(what would become Alec Station), dedicated solely to tracking Usama Bjn Ladin (UBL). who 
was perceived to be principally a financier tmtil l 996. It was at this point that UBL 's salience as 
a Lerrorist leader was disclosed by an al Qaeda operative (likely el Fadl:25X1 although 
Tenet could not remember his name), who identified UBL as a key player and al Qaeda as his 
core organjzation. He cited the existence of al Qaeda's Shura Council., warned that UBL 's intent 
was to target U.S. soil., and said that he was seeking to acquire chemical and biological 
weaponry. This operative·s disclosures were a Hwatershed"' for U.S. understanding of URL. 
Thus, UBL was already someone to whom CLA was paying attention when Tenet became DDCI. 
After the 1998 East African embassy bombings~ CIA had a strategic framework to address the 
elcmc=nls of the al Qaeda threat, but in 1999, a new scral~gic plan was required ("The Plan'). 
Declassified Under Authority of the 
Interagency Security Classification Appeals r
Panel, 
E.O. 13526, sec. 5.3(b)(3) 
NSC-directed ISCAP Review, Document 10 
Declassification Date: September 8, 2026 
b 25x1 
CRST.' 'NF 
I 
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
..:roP SEC:R±"f,25X1 'NF 
• -fGt-Tenet stressed the fact that there arc no parallels with oLher issues in terms of the way the 
U.S. Government (USG) was organized regarding countt:rtcrruri~m (CT): the Countcrtcrruri~m 
Security Group ( CSG) gave constant focus on this issue in all departments and agencies and met 
daily or more. The Government needed to be organized difterently on this issue because (I) CT 
was intensely operational~ (2) there was a constant flow of new data, and (3) the President was 
constantly issuing new covert action authorities. (T t:net noted that there is a 20-volume set of 
documents concerning ( J.S. Government activity in this area). Tenet himself chose to spend an 
cnom1ous amount of time on both strategic and tactical issues related to terrorism; it has been his 
constant focus. During the Mille1mium threat period .. for 
~f
example. there were constanl 
meetings-dailv 
~i:){t~1
or twice-daily-in the DCI conference room. He also took every opportunity to
~r,· ,;,,. , '.}' , ·.. ·····•• ..· · . · .· ,, '? ·c • •• • • ' • •• • • • 
---f5t-That being said, Tenet emphasized the fact that the hislorical context surrounding this focus 
on al Qaeda must be taken into account. Although terrorism was "number one" there were also 
other issues to contend with. notably the Balkans and Kosovo. and there were severe problems 
with resources. Finally, there was the overriding context of having to rebuild the CIA. 
Compared to l 9~ I. "we [CIA.I 5were not in good shape in 1997," having lost ~ ~'t •. :in 
funding and~~1\'..)personnel. The DO had basically stopped recruiting; the training program at 
25X1' was in disarray; and the Nationa) Security Agency (NSA) was 
also trymg to modernize its systems. According to Tenet, if you divorce this reality from CIA,s 
CT activities, then you are not seeing the full picture. Instead of focusing just on what resources 
CIA was allocating for CT, it is important to look at resources us a whole; despite problems in 
other areas~ CT resources continued to grow. This was because. in Tenet's opinion, there was no 
more dangerous threat to the U.S. than terrorism. 
Khobar Towers 
-(-St'I"enet cited the lranians~r more specifically t11e Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps 
(IRGC) working together with Saudi-Hezbollah--as having been behind the 1996 attack on 
Khobar Towers. He did not remember when that conclusion was reached, however, but recalled 
that UBL reccivt:<l a congratulatory message m Sudan after the attack. (Ben Bonk thought that 
a11 the evidence was pulled together rather conclusively by late 1998 or early 1999). Tenet also 
mentioned that there were sealed indictments related to this case. but he does not know when 
they were issued. • 
~Zelikow asked why the U.S. did not retaliate after Khobar Towers. Was it because (1) there 
was a lack of evidence, (2) there were links to high-level officials in the lranian govemment, or 
(3) the DCI never concluded who was responsible for the attack~ and this inability to determine 
culpability inhibit~d policy deliberations on retaliation? Tenet responded that he did not 
remember and would have to check the record. 
-(C) fenet added~ however, that the question of what to do about Iran is an enormously difficult 
one, 
4
'a tough nut to crack." Retaliation against Iran involves a qualitatively differenl target set 
TOP SECRET25X.1 NF 
2 
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
TOP SI:CRET25X1 'NF 
than, for example, Afghanistan, because the consequences of such an action arc very different. 
Hezbollah, he explained,. is very difficull to go up against-it is the ··A Team"' of ten·orism and 
has a world-wide asymmetric response capability. Tn the case of Khobar Towers, Tenet noted 
that U.S. consulate officials in Karachi had been killed in 1995, and this needed to be kepl in 
mind. Moreover, planning a military raid against Iran is extremely complicated, including the 
question of exactly which Iranian officials would be hit. 
-fStFinally .. Tenet does not think that a ~'tit-for-tat" response to te1TOrism was the mantra of the 
day (i.e. the idea of automatic retaliation for a terrorist incidenl}. In l998~ the principles in 
operation regarding how to deal with the terrorist threat were essentially: capture, rendition, and 
detention. He outlined the ways in which CIA was operating against UBL/al Qaeda overseas: 
hitting the terrorist infrastructure; breaking up cells (Tenet noted that by September 10, 2001 
there had been over 70 renditions of al Qaeda operatives to foreign custody); looking at finances; 
listening to communications; recruiting assets and exposing operations; and looking at ways to 
bring UBL to justice. The 1998 budget submission to Congress spoke of '~direct action" to 
intervene to render terrorists to justice. and this could be seen in a mutual and simultaneous 
relationship between cove1t action and law enforcement. {Tenet noted that CIA had an intimate 
relationship with the prosecutors of the Southern District of New York or SONY). 
(U) DCI Tenet did not remember whether UBL ,s possible connection to the OPM/SANG 
bombing was investigated. 
CIA's Evolving CT Strategy 
-f[s,26X1 Tenet noted that we did not know where UBL was right after he left Sudan in 1996, 
before it was detennined that he had moved to Afghanistan. Thereafter, CIA's foreign 
intelligence (FI) strategy was as he describ;9 ~b,9:y~. J11. teTT11~ <?f ,!i.tl:t9(iJi~s, there was a 
Memorandum of Notification (MON)~~l4X/}/). •• •• '. •• -'.: .:·. ·\ . : ·}}> but it was the August 
1998 MON that started off more aggressive actions as a reaction to policy guidance. 
The 1998 Capture Operation 
-fffu25X1 Zelikow noted that. even before 1998._ planning was underway for an effort to capture 
UBL, with the possibility of a SONY indictment of UBL (which likely would have influenced 
what could have done with UBL had he been captured), and Tenet added that the ~S~t . ~said 
that they were willing to take UBL. Tenet said that the capture operation was elaborately • 
planned with the military and FBI, and involved use of the Afghan tribals and planes on airstrips 
in Afghanistan. When a decision point was reached as to whether to proceed with the operation. 
however, it was the strong and unanimous recommendation of Deputy Director of Operations 
(ODO) Jack Downing. Chief of the Countcrterrorist Center (CTC) Geoff O'Connell, and Chief 
of Near East Division25X1 that the operation be cancelled due to all kinds of 
operational impediments and the risk of collateral damage. 
(TS,2:5X1 Tenet recalled talking about this issue for a long time-he '·probed on the operations 
side,'' and noted that the_Qnef--,}~~•f.s'.,J?.r~.~e,~~-<>f)~•c~ess_~-~-'~~-scri~.ed t9 him was less than 30% 
(the figure agreed upon ~t • ,. ,; . . ·: : ..·: . · , · , · , , '.r • . But it was on the basis 
TOP SsCRET.25X1 'NF 
3 
=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
TOP SECRET125X1 NF 
of the operational judgment and recommendation of his DDO, C/CTC and CINE th:it the DCI 
decided to ··turn off' the operation. After all. his three senior operational officers ,,.,·ere telling 
him. ~·this is ridiculous.~· 
fFSt-Tenet then called National Security Adviser Samuel ·sandy' Berger to relay the news that 
he had cancelled the operation. Ile did not ask for Bcrger·s opinion as tn whether to proceed but 
rather called Berger to inform him of his operational decision-not to debate the issue. (that is~ 
he did not offer Berger a choice). Tenet did not indicate that Berger pushed back at all on the 
decision. Tenet did not tell the Principals· Committee why he cancelled the operation because, 
in his opinion. it was not worth their time lo hear opt:ralional details for something he consid~red 
operationally unsound. He did not recall whether there was a memorandum memorializing his 
decision or the three CIA otlicers • recommendation. The decision was a matter of discipline and 
judgment; no oue wanted to 'ge( UBL more than CIA. 
The Saudis 
-ff'S'ricnet remarked that his contemporaneous trip to Saudi Arabia (May l 998) wns entirely 
unrelated Lo the cancellation of the capture operation. U.S. interaction with Saudi Arabia 
regarding UBL was a long and convoluted matter. extending over a period of years. Tenet 
described the relationship as involving ~'lots of push and shove engagement." (He suggested the 
Commission talk to Ambassador Wyche Fowler on this subject). 
25X1 
-tGt In the summer of 1998, Tenet did not think the USG was putting much faith in the Saudi 
initiative to persuade the Taliban lo give up UBL-at least no more faith than in any other 
opportunities that presented themselves. Rather. he saw the U.S. as Hpushing every button it 
could" to get access and information across the board, including from the Saudis. Tenet noted. 
for example, that the U.S. worked with the 2~~?_ . ·_::,knowing that they would probably not 
deliver: "You're doing everything you know l1ow to do." There were a lot of govemments with 
different views on terrorism - the only solution was engagement, not to shun them: "you just 
keeping pushing the buttons.'' 
TOP SECRET,25X1 NF 
4 
=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
TOP SECRET,25X1 NF 
~n 1998, Tenet thought that Crown Prince Abdullah was certainly sincere about helping the 
U.S.; he distinguished the Crown Prince as someone who was always he]pful, but the Saudi royal 
family was opaque. (He noted that this attitude changed dramatically on May 9, 2003). But 
from Tenet's perspective, it was not productive to characterize liaison relationships as good or 
bad, since we need to work with liaison partners regardless: HYou keep pushing the rock up the 
hill." 
-fGtTenet noted that we now know about Saudi funding of suspect charitable organizations that 
were in fact supporting al Qaeda, but was not sure about the extent of what the U.S. knew about 
this at the time. It was certainly no secret that Saudi Arabia was a veritable '•aircraft carrier'' for 
terrorist financing, but while many Saudi individuals are prominent fundraiscrs, does this mean 
that the Saudis in genera) are financing terrorism? Saudi Arabia is not a tightly-run society, and 
Wahabism allows certain activities to occur: but Tenet also noted that UBL was opposed to the 
Saudi royal family. 
-t6-l-Overall, Tenet saw the Saudis as very concerned about UBL, but he was not always 
convinced that they gave the U.S. everything they knew about him. Saudi societal elite must 
have known that donations to charities were going to UBL, but Tenet cannot prove it. He could 
not remember whether he talked to Turki about this issue; he usually went to the Saudis on 
specific operational issues-other people in the U.S. Government were talking to Saudi Arabia 
about other issues. Tenet said that he has a clear sense in his mind that there is something deeper 
that prevented the Saudis from taking direct action against UBL, perhaps related to the bin Ladin 
family and its constructio11 business, or perhaps it is simply that the Saudis tend toward being 
accommodating. 
--tet,enet had no recollection on the issue of U.S. access to the al Qaeda treasurer Madani al­
Tayyiib (to whom the Saudis had given sanctuary), but noted that getting direct access to people 
used to be a constant problem with the Saudis (thol.igh no longer). Bonk added that the Saudis 
were concerned that anything they gave the U.S. would be leaked to the media. 
The St.-u.J?sde for Access 
5X1~ Tenet noted that, in the context of using surrogate forces and people you did not 
know-and with no track record of being operationally adept-it simply made no sense to go 
forward with the capture operation in the spring of 1998. He explained that "the whole game" 
for CIA until 2001 was to increase its assets in Afghanistan~ and thus its collection capabilities, 
with the hope ofincreasing the probability of 'getting· UBL. There is a dynamic involved in 
covert action. Simply because policymakers write a11 MON does not mean that CIA can carry 
out a covert action program if it lacks Fl. Authorities are important, Tenet said, but it is the day­
to-day activities of penetration and collecting intelligence that are critical to the success of covert 
action. He added that the reason why the military was so successful in Afghanistan after 9/11 
was because of the intelligence preparation of the battlefield that had taken place beforehand. 
~ Tenet argued that the charge that 'the administration gave the CIA authorities and the CIA 
did not execute' is deceiving-you cannot exercise authorities in the absence of FI and real 
people with capability. ··pr is the basis for covert action,'1 he maintained, and though authorities 
TOP SECRET.25X1 NF 
5 
=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
TOP SECRE"f.~5X1 NF 
may make everyone feel better, execution of covert action depends entirely on uccc::;s: ··Struggle 
for act:css is the story.·· 
fFS'.25X1 One of the problems here was tha1. even before CIA started to use Predator as a 
reconnaissam.:c platfr>m1, it ,,..,as cle"r that il was m:ccssary to have U.S. eyes 011 the target--· 
otherwise you are relying on people who you pay to provide information hut do not control. 
Historical context is also relevant here; Tenet recalled the finding after the I986 Beirut bombing. 
that CIA was sponsoring a group of locals who had bombed a hospital. ~'Authorities play out in 
a continuum of history. knowledge. predicate [such as the executive order against assassination}: 
previous experience. and the Ders abiJity to protect the institutiont Tenet explained. fhese 
were very difficult issues to wrestle with, especially given the additional predicate: imposed by 
the MONs, that covert action against UBL was Lo be carried out in the contc"t of capture and 
rendition-and not kill. •'We were never put in a position to say; go kill this guy,1
1 
Tenet said: 
CIA did not have the ability to kill UBL. 
CIA's CT Strategy 
(C) Gommission Roemer asked whether DCI Tenet developed u strategy for deploying resources 
across the Intelligence Community {IC) to increase opportunities once the capture operation was 
cancelled. DCI Tenet responded that planning continued after that operation was cancelled. He 
added that l 999 was a critical departure point internally for USG CT policy: "we,, needed a new 
strategic plan, and CIA called it ~
4
the Plan." 
~5X1 TI1e Plan emphasized a multifaceted approach to doing Fl collection against UBL and 
his chief lieutenants. First and foremost, this strategy recognized that, to some extent, "we were 
victims of our own success": having25X1 so many people, CIA had not developed the close 
~X1 We needed tofet close to him. 'The Plan' aimed to track 
and gather intelligence on al Qaeda, focusing on 2f~ '?: ,/ ~f:·:~··' ",· •~\ \ ·t •'. and most importantly 
Afgha11istan.~~:':it.:·~/}j{ :•;.:. ·_·> .•. ·> •• , • jn.Af~hanistan, and making use of 
1the N orthem Alliance, :lo 
There was also a whole methodology for training the next generation of C'l' othcers ancl to 
recmit the right people for CTC. 
"'t'StThe foreign piece of this new approach was very important. Tenet stressed the point that the 
U.S. cannot _fight terrorism alon~, but 1~eed~ to w~rk with ~?'t~ovi~e, trai,nif!g a~d education, 
i.i.:.~.~-i.:.:.1.r.~.·······r·;,·rt fnrr.1Pn ~~1n?···.·.!······p·····:l;)(erc1s~~hfl~*~llJ ".~!llnst ~ITQ~wr,, l •••••• : • ' • • 
... .::~, ,/<!·-~.:~..·.•,~·....:,;:-...:~-..- - ~ 
6 25 1TOP S£C.RET. X 'NF 
=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
NF 
~All the while when CIA was making these effons, there were three very difficult periods of 
significant threat reporting: (1) the Millennium (approximately November 1999 lo February 
2000); (2) Ramadan (fall of 2000); and {3) the summer of 200 l. These periods ~ere "absoJutely 
all-consuming" from an operational perspective. CIA was ~oo~dinating with ~ountries, 
(during the Millennium threat period Tenet talked to~; , ".~ artn~rs personally), and 
extensive disruption efforts thwarted plots against a number of U.S. facilities. As a result, FI 
collection may have suffered. This is part of the context for understanding how CIA was trying 
to put itself in a better position for ~ountering the terrorist threat. 
--tetWhen Tenet issued his ''declaration of war" memorandum in December 1998, 
ADCI/Collection Charlie Allen began to get the IC together to coordinate collection efforts, 
convening daily meetings to drive collection. Allen "drives this boat every day/' Tenet 
commented, adding that there was Han almost obsessional pace,, to these collection efforts. 
Responding to the East Africa Embassy Bombings, August 1998 
~enet recalled that evidence of UBL and al Qaeda's links to the embassy bombings emerged 
very quickly after the attacks~ and that there were "a lot" of meetings-perhaps 3 to 5-to decide 
how the U.S. should respond. The military was charged with developing retaliatory options~ but 
Tenet could not recall that 'boots on the ground, was one of these. A set of targets were 
develope..J•~~:;,:Hic'-''"''.;%'-"'~'-/;.\~l,\;l;~.!..',,,¾c,i\~~,:~ii.~j!•;,;f,j,;,,:,;.,.~~hat . • ~-~,~~:7{z.r~?Jr;_~~-~-!~~{~~~1-fjlW:n.\f~;i~@(m.n: there was gomg • to be a meetmg •
~~~~-!'.t:~~.:...::tt...=~::.;.:~~~"~~~.:;... ....:, of the
senior al Qaeda leadership at Khost (which the U.S. strike missed by a few hours). Targets in 
Sudan were also considered, including a UBL business and tannery. 
(C)""'fhe Sudanese targets engendered a lot of discussion. A decision was eventually made to 
separate the economic targets (such as the tannery and UBL business) from the al-Shifa target 
{he did not recall why the tannery was taken off the targel list). Tenet remembered n:cciving a 
call al 2 a.m. from President Clinton to talk about this decision. Tenet'summarized their 
discussion thus: the President asked him what he thought about the target set, Tenet told him, the 
President made his decision, '"and that's that." Regarding the decision to target the al-Shifa 
phannaceutical plant (where CIA had evidence that al Qaeda was developing a VX precursor), 
Tenet said that he still feels good about this decision, and nothing has ever changed his view on 
this. The targets chosen seemed reasonable to him at the time, and he thought the decision­
making behind them was rational. 
~enet dismissed the notion that political concerns entered into discussions on whether to 
retaliate for the embassy bombings. He said that all the deliberations he sat in on were serious, 
and no political consideration ever showed up. But obviously this ,was a ditlicult political time, 
'"that's the way it was.'' Tenet only saw President Clinton once during this period, but found him 
very engaged on this matter and not distracted at all by his personal problems; the issue was 
handled very professionally. 
TOP SECRE.T.25X~;--- 7 
=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
TOP ~ECR:ET25X1 
-f.Gt.Tenet was not aware of whether there had been joint planning between CIA and the military 
on a target list before Operation Infinite Reach. uor whether ti~!11Jl~tarv had oreviouslv oreoarec.l 
contingency plans for such an attack. But he did know that 2 ' 
25X1, XS 
25X1, XS there was active military engagement with CIA throughout this 
period through the Associate DCI for Militc:1ry Support (ADCl/MS). He thought that there 
probably was a lot of planning going on in the military. Tenet had no recollection of debates 
about further military strikes beyond the August 20th strikes (nor had Bonk) or of a Principals 
Committee meeting on the subject, and had not heard of Clarke's Delenda plan. 
-fffi25X1 In Tenet's opinion. the objective of Qo~ration. Infinite Reach was to decapitate the al 
Qaeda leadership through military strikes. 25X1. • . .· :al Qaeda's Khost meeting had 
"raised the bar" on U.S. objectives. and "made it more interesting.'' After the attacks failed to 
achieve this goal, however, CIA~s next step was to return to covert action options and continue 
down that path. 
Eyes-On Opportunities 
~X1 fenet related that there were three separate instances following the August 1998 
strike when the gyros on TLAMs were spun in preparation for a shot at UBL. On all three 
occasions, Tenet recalled prudent: collective decision-making on the part of the policymnkers. 
Tenet himself would provide the Principals with his own take on what was known and not 
known: "this was very straight up." He added that these were very difficult, time-sensitive 
decisions, and in no instance were the policymakers relying on American eyes on the targets. 111 
one case, CIA only corroborated UBL 's presence at the target site after the fact. (Tenet did not 
identify which instance provided the best opportunity to target UBL). 
(TS:25X1 Tenet read from a CIA staff paper prepared to brief him for this interview (which will 
be provided to the Commission) to describe these three occasions which, he noted, were always 
'~serendipitous"-and sometimes happened on a weekend, when Principals were not in their 
offices. He noted that at some point all the Principals had been given principle target sets~~t '. 
J~.l(.1:.::: ._.,. ·<plnc~s where UBL ~..ls likely To be), so That when the 
-~pportunity arose a decision could he made quickly as to whether or not to launch the missiles. 
5X1 ~ The first instance occurred during the period from November through to late 
December, 1998. [Others have discussed this as a Dec.:ember 23. 1998 l·ighting]. There was 
concern about the veracity of the source and also about the risk of collateral damage to a nearby 
mosque. 
~X1 The second instance occurred in the February to March, 1999 period~ and focused on 
UBL's sighting near a UAE hunting camp25X1 Tenet hims~lf did not recall 
exactly what had happened on this occasion, but read trom h1s briefing paper that a po~cv 
dcci,s}o~_wl!s !1:l~~e ~egarding the UAE in early March, the camp was dismantled, and2 X1 
~t>. ···, :. <- · 'UBL had been warned. Rousseau noted that in this case there was a serious 
foreign policy concern about collateral damage to the Emirate princes at the nearby hunting 
25X1.TOP£ECReT·· • 'NF 
8 
=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
TOP fiEGRF.T25X1 
camp, and that, according to diplomatic cable traffic. the UAE had consequently been warned by 
the NSC's Dick Clarke. Rousseau also mentioned a State reporting cabJe (written by the 
Ambassador) recounting how a UAE of1icia1 was in a car with the Secretary or Defense and an 
Ambassador, and that the official thanked the USG for the warning call. As to whether Clarke's 
call happened before or after a decision had been inndc whether to strike UBL. Rousseau's 
impression was that the call was made before the decision. Tenet said he hnd no recollection of 
having given clearance to anyone lo call the UAE. 
-<Ts.2!iX1 The third instance occurred in May 1999 in the Kandahar area. where UBL was 
tracked for almost a week. No strike occurred., however, because the militnry was concerned 
about the precision of the source's reporting and the risk of collateral damage. 
(TS,25X1 l'enet could not remember each of these instances specifically~ but recalled that in all 
cases the same predicates prevented a strike: the intellig~nce was single-threaded, there was a 
risk of collateral damage. orthe target was too dense. These were complicated decisions to make 
because a lot of data was involved. but at the end of the day Tenet found the decisions rational 
and reasonable, and there was not a lot of disagreement among the decision-makers. 
On the first and third instances, the TLAM option was rejccLed outright. and the second never 
came to a clear decision point. 
Actionable Intelligence 
(TS,25X1 fenet did not remember a proposal for forward deploying AC-140s to minimize the 
risk of collateral damage in the case of a TLAM strike. He noted that the military brings 
targeting expertise to the table .. and is traditionally very conservative-and for good measure; 
before committing military force, a high degree of confidence in the quality of intelligence is 
required. This was true in the case of UBL with regard to both the accuracy of the target's 
location (is he where these people say he is?) and the reliability of the25X1 assets (what 
was their motive and agenda? Were the tribals penetrated by Al Qaeda operatives?) Tenet noted 
tha.t in the decision-ma.king proc;css, it is the OCI's responsibility to point out shortfalls and gaps 
in the intelligence. But in none of the three instances when a military strike was considered was 
there a case when Tenet had high confidence in the intelligence and no one acted. In fact, he 
pointed out that there was no light between the DCI and the policymakers (including the 
President) in any of these instances. 
(C) Tenet did not support the argument that the policymakers' decisions on making strikes 
against UBL were affected by the fact thut the U.S. was contemporaneously bombing Serbia and 
Kosovo. Tenet thought that the Kosovo war was irrelevant-the decision not to attack UBL in 
May 1999 was made on its own merits. 
(TS.25X1 renet did not recall another instance after May 1999 when there was an opportLtnity 
to launch a TLAM strik~ against UBL.25X1 
25X1 
TOP SECRET.25X1 NF 
9 
=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
TOP S£CH:ET!2 5X1 NF 
Legal ~uthorities 
--fl=&25X1 Tenet noted that these three opportunities to strike UBL were military operations. and 
not covert action prob,1fams, and thus entailed a very different set of authorities despite the fact 
that the intelligence issues were similar. While military action involves U.S. assets, covert action 
policy toward UBL was using surrogates. and these two sets of activities engendered very 
different levels of confidence in terms of who was doing the shoo:ing. He stressed that there i~ 
not symmetry between these two policy tools. 
5 1 ~ X On the issue of what authorities CIA had for conducting covert action programs 
against UBL, Tenet e~plained that, other than the authorities outlined in the July 1999 MON 
(which allowed ~5~1 __ _. •• _· -:' •his instructions were plain: the MONs stated 
the clear predicate and preference of capturing or rendering UBL, and killing was only allowed 
in the context of a capture operation. It was understood, Tenet said, that the likelihood of 
actually detaining UBL was low while the probability that he might be killed in this context was 
high. But capture was the predicate for the operation. 
(TSJ25X1 renet noted that operational planning for a capture and a kilJ operation is very 
different. But the point is not that CIA only had authority to capture, but rather that the predicate 
throughout was that the basis for proceeding on a covert action program against UBL was a well­
detailed capture operation. There was clear understanding lhat those carrying out the operation 
would encounter lethal action, and in the context of self-defense everyone recognized that UBL 
would be killed. But this was a very different context than that required for hiring snipers to bide 
in a tree and kill UBL. 
--{TS,2~1 According to Tenet, the reason why successive MONs were issued from 1998 to 1999 
was in order to give CIA more latitude to capture/detain/render UBL. He noted that MONs are a 
matter of operation, law and policy. Before CIA sends an operational matter like this downtown 
there are internal deliberations about what CIA wants to achieve; then the CIA's draft goes to the 
NSC's lawyer's group, and then to a Deputies' Committee. After that, in the Principals' 
Committee, the Attorney General is very important and active in the review process. As Tenet 
explained, everyone was trying to work out how to 'gee UBL within the context of what was 
allowable by law. 
-(Ts ..25X1 Asked whether CIA received the covert action authority that he wanted, Tc:net replied 
yes. He said that he never pounded the table to demand that Executive Order 12333 banning 
assassination be revoked-and no one in CIA asked for this. Tenet added, however, that he 
assumed that if CIA had had a good chance to kill UBL, then he would have asked for that 
authority and for EO 12333 to have been waived. 
(TS25X1 Tenet said that no ont= (neither Clarke or Berger) ever told him that the President 
wanted UBL dead. '"We all wanted him dead," Tenet observed, but as a practical matter this was 
irrelevant without putling it down on a piece of paper. "The fact that we wanted him dead had 
nothing to do with the practical matter of getting him.'~ he explained, and ;
4
the paper's what 
guides what we do. The paper,s what matters. I don't care what anybody says ... The paper's 
what guides operational planning and guidance.,, 
TOP Sf3CRET.25X~ 
10 
=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
25X1TOP SECRET. NF 
5X1~ Tenet noted that early on in the new Bush administration, DDCI McLaughlin lllt!t 
with National Security Adviser Condoleeza Rice and her deputy, Steve Hadley, to walk them 
through the MONs. 
The Februarv 1999 MON 
(TS,25X1 I'enet read out loud the original language in the February 1999 MON that had been 
replaced by the Presidcnfs hand. £hat "~ir a successful capture operation is noL feasible~ we would 
request that you undertake offensive operations to kill Bin Ladin with his principal lieutenants.,. 
-fTS 2~ 1 According to Tenet, what CIA was trying to say with this language was. ·Lwe want a 
little latitude here_... He saw the original text as indicating that CIA was asking to design a kill 
operation from the offset: or as General Counsel Muller explained, C[A sought the authority to 
kill UBL. That being said, Tenet was not aware of what internal discussions within CIA were 
behind this MON. Therefore. he could not sp\!ak to what CLA wanted tu achieve from the MON. 
nor whether, for example, new intelligence or access had stimulated it (as was the case tbr the 
July 1999 MON). He said that he needed to find CIA's notice of transmittal of the draft MON to 
the NSC and CIA 's internal papers produced 25X1• •concerning this draft MON. and 
would get back to the Commission with more information. Tenet also noted that he did not 
know what the Anorney General•s perspective had been on these draft authorities. 
(TS,25X1 President Clinton hand-edited this MON, and replaced the language previously cited 
with his own: "We understand that capture may not be possible and that Bin Ladin and his 
lieutenants may be killed in the confrontation:' According to Tenet, the President's language 
kept the policy consistent. lt took the MON back to the previous ·capture preferred' authority, 
that is, giving less lat~f·_~i~.~~-f91tgimll langu~ge would have author!zed. He read from a 
note sent by th~ NSC·-:::t_':-·,.:<'''(\··::· ':<i , •• :regarding the new MON, stating that EO 12333 was 
still in force and giving clear operational direction that a capture/rendition was required. (_Note: 
Commissioner Ben-Veniste said that he would interpret the NSC 's note differently, i.e. that 
killing wus !)·till allowed]. Muller said that the t>resident"s changes made it clear that CIA could 
not tell Masood to kill UBL After this MON was issued, the DC.I said that "'we were plowing 
the same ground.'' 
-{Ts 26X1 Tenet said that he did not ta1k directly to President Clinton about the handwritten 
edits on the February 1999 MON either before or after the MON was approved, and could not 
recall ifhe had spoken lo Berger about them. He felt that the President is the commander-in­
chief, that the MONs go through a long and laborious process, and that the language was clear 
and did not require clarification. Tenet thought that the new language might have come from 
NSC Legal 's Jamie Baker and the NSC~ Muller said that he coulJ speculate about a legal reason 
for such language. Tenet added here that it is easy in 2004 to say how the process of detennining 
new lethal authorities should have been back in 1998, but we need to look at the situation as it 
was at the time, and here context is key. Hence he needs to review CIA, s history of the 
document. Tenet could not speak to the question of whether the PresidenL's amendment to the 
25X1TOP SECRF.Ts \JF 
11 
=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
TOP SECRC-F,25X1 NF 
MoN actually inhibited operations. for example. without being able to address questions 
regarding tvJasood. capabilily, and access at that time. 1 
The July 1999 MON 
(TS,25X1 Regarding the Jul)· 1999 MON, Tenet noted that th~ President gramed. CIA expan<le<l 
authorities to shoal down aircraft because CIA had new intelligence that UBL was using 
helicopters to travel. When CIA could provide more intelligence about UBL, it received more 
authority~ and in this instance, the new authorities were commensurate with new intelligence and 
thus a new opportunity. But the MON still had the predicate of capture. Thus perhaps the end 
state that was being authorized through this MOI\ was different from previous MONs, but not 
the guidance as to what CIA was being asked to do. CIA never received authority to tell its 25X1 
assets or other groups on the ground, Hgo kill him.', 
Covert Action 
~5X1 f enet noted that clearly covert action against UBL was not successful before 9-11. 
The probability of success was about I 0%, but Tenet added that there was also the possibility of 
"serendipity.', uYou don't prejudge these things," he exJ:?lained. commenting that CIA had not 
e~1-1ected to capture Khalid Sheilch Mohammed either2?X1 :_, • ::'-:· • _ :. '·.. . _ '.·: .,. 
~~I -~- ··: r:<_:· ..• ·-· • ··/,c'.:' Ultimately,youarealwayss1mplytryingtoputyourscifina 
position to try to get the operation done. Tenet did not know how much the policymakers should 
have bet on covert action solving their terrorist problem. but noted again: CIA might get lucky. 
2 1 --tTs. 5X Afghanistan was, however, an enormously difficult operational environment-and the 
Pakistanis did not help. (Tenet commented that the Pakistanis could have delivered ½ of UBL's 
lieutenants if they had wanted to, but were cooperating with UBL). Tenet judged CIA's odds of 
success in Afghanistan as probably t0-20%, but he did not put much stake on probability for 
"you could get really lucky on any given day." The only course was to be constantly thinking of 
ways to maximize your probability of success. According to Tenet, Berger understood this, and 
knew that covert action "wasn ,ta silver bullet."'' 
11 
Assets 
(Ts~X1 • Tenet recalled looking at lots of briefing charts in 1998 an<.l I 999, showing ~~at {)BL 
was traveling toward the northern border with Uzbekistan, ~~Xt ... ' ,.·:: •
,':JlllI'. •• ••• .... •· • 
•~X1 In the DCl's follow•up session with the Commission. on January 2Bd'. 2004, Tenet again spoke to the 
President's edits to the February 1999 MON. saying that once the President makes a determination it is done. Bonk 
added that one did not challenge the Presidcnt
1
s decision, and that no one recalled relaying to the White House that 
ClA thought the MON inhibited their ability to carry out a covert action using Masood. He would rctisc issues 
regarding Masood ant.I the capture of UBL with the NSC along he lines that Masood was more interested in fighting 
the Taliban rhan capturing UBL or helping the U.S. 
12 25 1 TOP SECR£T, X NF 
=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
25 1TOP SF.CRF'.T X Nf-
(TS,25X1 The Northern Alliance also held promise, although they had limited geographical 
access. In 1999, CIA met up with Masood 25X1• • but Masood 
was being beaten militarily by the Taliban. Tenet described Masood as·\, player'·, a man who 
was smart. respected, and had good contacts, though he was always ~'his own man.,: From 
Tenet's perspective, Masood was the most interesting of the CIA 's options~ because of his 
capabilities. 
~X1 fenet did not recall that there had been a flap within CIA when the Northern Alliance 
rocketed al Qaeda's Denmta training camp in late December 1999 without authority. But he 
noted that CIA had never aske::d for such authority and Tenet did ne>t know why exactly. He 
explaiuec.l. however. that these issues wer~ tied to Afghan tribal politics and relationships. and 
raised large policy issues regarding choosing sides (Taliban vs. Northern Alliance~ '~It played 
inside the big Afghan dynamic,., Tenet said, and affected m~jor players such as 25 1 
'~this is big policy stuff! Bigger than just, go get this guy.,, He recalled policy discussions on 
these kinds of issues during the Clinton administration, but no one could conclude what to do. 
As for the Derunta attack, Tenet commented that since this occun·ed at the height of the 
Millennium threat, when he was in the middle of '"the biggest asses to elbow'' effo11 he had yet 
seen, this was no doubt just "a blip,. on his screen. ~'Stuff happens at the lowest levels of every 
organization," he commented. 
-fTS,:ZSXi Asked why the CIA never put its own officers on the ground in Afghanistan, Tenet 
noted that the C[A did send in learns to meet up with the Northern Alliance on three occasions. 
But going into the south, and getting people into Kandahar, was not a trivial problem. 25X1 
25Xf 
25X1 fenet noted 
# , 
however, that he certainly looked into trying to send more people into Afghanistan, 25X1 
25X1, XS 
-fTSTTenet said that he did not remember anything about a25X1 becoming 
available lo CIA in February 1999, nor a Small Group met:ting on February 2"
0 
about the net:d 
for the U.S. to be able to act quickJy25X1 
25X1 
The DCl's Role in the Policymaking Process: nI am not a policymaker'' 
-(€tTenet clearly stated that he is not a policymaker. He found his role in the policymaking 
process to be clear: the DCI presents the intelligence, briefs what he is doing on Fl collection and 
covert action, offers operational judgments-and then the policymakers debate the policy 
options. He himself does not make policy. (Tenet noted: however, that he would opine on a 
policy option that seemed particularly stupid or interfered with his own operations). He summed 
up his role in policy,meetings as spending 99.9% of bis time listening to policy questions On 
2 In the Commission's January 1sli• 2004 interview with DCI Tener. DC/AQ/CTC 25X1 1oled that there 
is some misconception about a 25X1 from her research. she thmks that the 25X1 tried to 
supplement the information they had with 25X1 but none was forthcoming. 
TOP SECRET25X1 NF 
13 
=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
TOP SECR£T25X1 NF 
foreign trips, Tenet explained that he travels as an emissary of the policymakers, and always 
clears what he will say with the policy community. His talking points are always scripted in 
conjunction with the USG, unless he is talking about security and intelligence on which he is 
allowed free latitude. 
-te)-According to Tenet. there is •la very clear, bright red line" between the role of the DC[ and 
that of the policymaker which is not crossed unless the President asks the DCI for his opinion. 
There must be discipline in CIA. Otherwise, ~'you cross that line and you're in lran-Contra," 
Tenet said, adding, ·'we've had people who've gone to jail!" CIA initiates operations only to 
support the po1icy directives, and Tenet said that this is well understood by the Principals he has 
worked with and for, who know that you do not consciously cross over into others' 
responsibilities. Besides, he has enough to do without getting involved in policy issues. How 
did CIA react ro the NSC's Dick Clarke pushing the C[A to initiate an MON or Finding? Tenet 
said that his response is to examine operational feasibility. like a mechanic. Policymakers must 
decide how intelligence fits into the entire structure: Hit is their job to figure out where I fit into 
their puzzle.,, According to Tenet, intelligence is just one instrument of policy. '·I know what 
I'm responsible for. I've got my box covered.'~ 
Resources 
~Tenet noted that he could have had more flexibility on covert action ifhe had received more 
resources. Although from a foreig11 policy perspective there was never anything through both 
the Clinton and Bush administrations that he needed to do and was not able to, money was a big 
issue for him, and one that he did not think was satisfactorily resolved before 9-11. He cited 
terrorist financing:, for example, as a covert actjon issue where more money would have been 
useful operationally. 
(S) Ben Bonk noted that in 2000, after the Millennium threat had subsided, CTC had to scale 
back activities as it waited for supplemental money to arrive. (He did not recall raising this issue 
with the DCI, but rather CTC simply had to wait for the money to work its way through the 
system.g~:~: \· ·:, :, , .: · . ·,"_ • \ .,. •: Moseman added that there was a "color of money"1 
problcm,-·tha"t is·.·che-q-ueition of whether money allocated for Fr could be used for covert action 
and vice versa (funds were generally not able to be mixed and matched). The DCI said that if 
operations were .measurably affected by these resource issues, he had not been aware of it. 
(U) Commissioner Roemer asked for more specificity regarding where opposition to CIA's 
requests for more money came from. Tenet was well-prepared with a response. He said that tbe 
Commission should look at his Congressional testimony to the Joint Inquiry. CTC was 
increasing in resources while the rest of CIA was decreasing. Tenet recalled intense negotiation 
with the Office of Management and Budget (0MB) on his need for more money, and he wrote to 
the President twice asking for additional resources. (He will provide the Commission with this 
correspondence). In 1998, he took the unprecedented move of going out of charu1els by speaking 
directly to Speaker Gingrich to get the necessary supplemental-explaining that this was the 
only way he knew to get the money he needed. The resulting~~t:: .• • "'..vas "a lifesaver for 
terrorism" and other programs (not just for CTC). Tenet also recalled teiling Senator Kyl (or 
~X,1·:TOP SBCRB~; •..: - . NF 
14 
=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
25X1
TOPSCCRET NF 
possibly Senator Roberts) in his Congressional testimony Lhal he rn:cdc<l uu additional ~SXi 
e;ich year over several years. According to Tenet he did everything that he could to secure the 
necessary funding. This included reprogramming money (though he noted that reprogramming 
• requires the support of six Congressional Committees. raises larger questions regarding the 
National Foreign Inlelligence Program base. and also inhibits his opt!rational flexibility). Tenet 
added that the monev after 9-11 was ··a big. big plust:25X1
25X1 -
..fG,-Tenet remarked that supplementals are ;·great''-CTC1s money was a result of 
supplementals. for example-but they only pay for certain things. What is needed above all is to 
add to the base. In this sense, it is not possible to separate CT funding specifically (CTC and 
Alec Station) from the broader picture of: for instance, the efforts of CIA's case officers around 
the world. No single metric will suffice for understanding how much CIA was spending on its 
CT effnrtc; because this is not how the business works. (Tenet noted~ however. that there were 
about 25X1people working CT, but there were also 25X1 'people working th~ Balkans issue in 
CJA, i.e. CIA did not have enough personnel on CT). 
_...(.Srf"o really understand how all of CIA's funding was being reflected in CT activity, Tenet said 
that he needed to take off his CIA hat and put on his DCI hat. because he had so many things to 
fix across the Intelligence Community: SIGINT, recruitment, training, languages and so on. 
According to Tenet. the base is what energizes the CT effort. and in this respect he had a lot of 
work to do. 25X1 , 
25X1 attrition in the DO when Tenet became DCI in 1997 
was astounding. Shame on CIA for letting it happen~ he said. As a result, CIA launched an 
effort to recruit case officers, and through ~rhe Plan'~ a unique training program for CT officers 
isx1 To do that recruiting and training, CIA needed to invest in 
infrastructure.. rebuilding the system from the ground up. As a senior manger, this was what 
Tenet thought was necessary: to rebuild across the board. 
~..enct noted that at the time he und~rstood that the DO was not uoing to be:: able to meet the: 
requirl!ments of its Strategic Plan 25X1 • but said that this 
was all the money he had; he also knew that if he set the bar lower, the DO would recruit even 
tewer people~ so he chose a number that was larger than was possible. To find a resource plan to 
support the new capabilities that Tenet wanted to build, he directed the Commission's attention 
first, to the CIA's budget submission to Congress. and secund. to the fact that ADCI/C Charlie 
Allen was ;.driving the Community nuts'' in tenns of collection against terrorism. Tenet did not 
recall Dick Clarke complaining to him about the CIA 's budget numbers, and was also unaware 
of Clarke's budgeiary exercise involving the CIA's Chief Financial Ofticer. No one at the NSC 
ever told him that they were unhappy with his performance. 
(U) On the question of Congressional interest in Tenet's efforts. he noted that between 1997 and 
2001 he was only invited once by the House Permanent Select Intelligence Committee (HPSCI) 
to give testimony on the subject of his strategic CT program (as opposed to budgetary matters). 
despite the fact that he was delivering waming after warning nn terrorism. [It should he noted 
that, in the Cnmmissioner/Commissfon-stafflunchcon that day, Commissioner Roemer noted that 
TOP EJECRETl25X1 NF 
15 
=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
25 1TOP SLCRCT X 
(a) Sena/or Shelby, Chairmw1 ofthe SSC/, opposed DC/ Tenet and likely rc_fi'ainedfi"om ;,n•iting 
him in order not lo give DC/ Tenet Cl pla(/orm tu look Rood, and (b.J DCI Tenet wasfamiliar with 
how Congress ·worked and knew 1ha1 tlhe l1C1cl .wmething that he wamed to share wilh Co11gress. 
such us ,, CT strateg,v, he could h{l\'C 1vorked with Congress to secw·c an opportunity to tesNJj,. 1 
--tf;Hf CIA had had more money., would this have made a ditlerence in preventing the 9· 11 
attacks'? Tenet responded that the question raised the issue of whnt effect on the plot capturing 
or killing UBL would have had. He noted that al Qaeda plans for a long time. {the bombing of 
the U.S. Embassy in Kenya was planned for five year)~ has impressive operational security, is 
careful, compartmentalized~ and decentralized regarding its command and conn·ol. The clear 
implication of Tenet's words was that it was unlikely that greater resources would have 
prevented the attacks. 
The DCl's Declaration of War, December 1998 
~n the morning of December 4.. 1998. the President's Daily Briefing (PDB) reported that 
there was a heightened threat environment. and that UBL and his allies were moving closer to 
implementing an attack on U.S. interests-the following week there would be a similar report 
referring to imminent attacks. Thus the DCI's mindset when he issued his ;declaration of war' 
against UBL was focused on the need lo better manage internal mechanisms within the 
Intelligence Community to make sure that analysis and collection on UBL were on track. His 
memo had specific taskings, and subsequently ADCI/C Charlie Allen began to hold daily 
meetings. According to Tenet, his memo was a rct1cction of what was on his mind at the time, 
and an instruction to "let it rip." 
-rs}:rhis was a period when the DCI was meeting reguJarly with CTC on the UBL problem. 
And., contrary to the Joint lnquirts conclusions, Tenet insisted that there was a plan for ramping 
up war-like activities. His memo was the beginning of an educational process as to how to attack 
the threat differently, that ultimately resulted in 'The Plan.' From this point, CTC and the ODO 
were pushing everyone to work harder: and Allen was driving the collection community. 
(Zelikow also noted that this was the point when daily Situation Reports began to be sent to the 
\Vhite House, which wc=re probably the same a~ thl.! briefings being prepared for thi:: DC[). 
--tS,-=fenet did not recall a proposal discussed in the Small Group to tly a U2 over Afghanistan in 
February 1999 (and recommended the Commission talk to Charlie Allen about this), but noted 
that this was probably part of a constant struggle for better collection over Afghanistan. [Tenet 
said he would check on this issue for the Commissionj. 
Terrorist Financing 
~~1' /~~~~~~_sjy~~~?-~h.ff~!_i~s. Wt1re n9t_ 
,•,', 
i.n._pl~C$ 
', .•
tq. allQJ'...C!f~ .t9 J?t~r~~~ 
l ..~.i_ip:> . < < :\I"fil{ ..... ..••· ·• " ,. 
l!~~.~~ 
.•' 
fi.~1;I!fes. 
.· ·, 
.'... ...:-·~· ... ·~ ' ,. .~· . 
16 -10PSECRET, 25X1 NF 
-----------·-· ·-· ------------._, 
=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
25X1
TOP SECRET, NF 
25X1 
Mid-1999 
~Zclikow cited a June 1999 memo from Berger (though most likely written by Clarke) to 
President Clinton, which summarized CT activities and concerns at the time. According to th~ 
memo: 
(1) The U.S. was doing disruptions, 2S)C:1'-· : - . 'had 
deferred action on the Northern Alliance, was pushing targeting on UBL via 25X1 in 
order to "capture'' him, had no luck with a missile attack -and the threat was continuing. 
More attacks were a certainty and could come in the U.S. and involve WMD. 
(2) We will not get better intelligence. 
(3) We cannot wait around. 
(4) The next step is preemption-such as going after Derunta-or waiting to be attacked, 
but by then the camps will be empty. 
(5) Covert action was not fruitful. 
Tenet said that he believed this was a fair state of events for that period, and agreed with 
Clarke's characterization. (though not on the point that the U.S. would not get more information 
on WMD). 
~cgarding the tum-over in CTC's leadership at CIA in mid-1999. Tenet said that he did not 
recall Clarke talking to him about C/CTC Geoff O'Connell and noted that if he did. any concerns 
expressed by Clarke would not have mattered to him: he did not care whether Clarke did not like 
O,Connell. [Note: Clarke has told the Commission he asked Tenet to fire O'Connell). Tenet said 
no concems were involved in the changes at CTC other than the normaL routine rotation of 
officers. He found C/Alec Mike Scheuer lo be an enormously talented individual who he liked 
very much. and O'Connell was also very good. He was aware that there was tension within ere 
TOP SECR.El 25X1~· . .:· .NF 
17 
=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
25X1 
FOP SECIUiT. NF 
(between Scheuer and the management). and noted thal this no dOL1bt affected the chain of 
command and how Scheuer was viewed. 
-f&t-By the summer of 1999, Tenet noted that CT efforts against UBL may not have looked as if 
they were on a good track. but ·worldwide-and outside of Afghanistan-things were always 
getting better frnm an operations tempo perspective. Disruptions and recruitment were 
continuing; the U.S. ··was playing offense and defense simultaneously .•, Tenet tried to convey a 
sense of how much activity was going on at CIA- -that CT efforts were not static-saying that 
unless you ;~lived
0 
here (al CIA). you could not understand just how much was happening. 
Everything was moving along, Tenet explained, and things were always getting better. 
-fSTTenet did not recall another Saudi initiative to put pressure on the Taliban to expel UBL in 
the summer oft 999, nor a meeting of the Small Group to discuss il. He also did not remember 
intelligence indicating that the Saudis had sent the Taliban money via the UAE (as reported in 
the PDB in May and July 1999). 
The Northern Alliance 
"(TS.25X1 !\ccording to Tenet, Masood looked as if he had capabilities that were wo11h investing 
i.n:. he had access on the ground and territorv. he might well be able to generate networks. and i5x-1 •• • • 
25X1 Yet Masood was not ow· man-his issue was fighting the 
Taliban, that is, he had broader interests than the U.S. 's UBL-focus. 25X1 
25X1 
-fF9725X1 CIA had no authority to talk to Masood about bringing the fight to the Taliban 
because this was a policy issue. There were policy discussions about arming the Northem 
Alliance against the Taliban, but this was a complicated matter for the USG because it was not a 
straight-up CT issue but was woven into the geopolitics of the region, and thus tied up with 
policy toward Pakistan, India,. Russia. and so on. The USG never came to a conclusion on the 
subject Tenet did not recall exactly what he said al these polk~}' discussions. but believes he was 
an advocate of giving lethal assistance to Masood (though ht: needs lo check on this). This was 
certainly the clear position at lower levels of the USG. but he is not sure how it played out at 
upper levels. 
Learning from the Millennium Tiu-eat 
(TS) Tenet recalled the Millennium threat a~ an exhausting period of time (November 1999 
through February 2000). Cooperation was exceptional during this period; he had daily 
consultations with Berger, the Attorney General. and the Director of the FBI. there was good 
interaction with the FBI at all levels, and more FISAs were processed during a short period of 
time than ever ~fore. CIA was working across the world: 36 targets (al Qaeda personnel) were 
identified~ and 21 individuals were caught! and there were disruptions "all over the place." Tenet 
TOP S£:CRETI·25X1 NF 
18 
=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
TOP SECRET,25X1 
described this as probably the most difficult operational environ~ent CfA had ever faced. and 
CIA was exhausted by it. 
i€tAccording to Tenet. there were: a number of takeaways from this c:xncriencc. First. Rcssam 
was stopped from crossing the border into the {J .s.25X1 
25X1 .here was the plot 
against LAX and the Seattle target-two domestic targets. Retrospectively. these were important 
examples of the potential for domestic attack. and this may have been a lime to focus on the 
domestic threat they represented. In March 2000, Berger held a resource meeting on the 
Millennium, to discuss how to do this better. Agencies came to the table asking for a lot of 
money. and the meeting never went anywhere-he is not sure why .. 
-+Gt-Looking back now, Tenet recognizes that at this time the country was absolutely unprotected. 
Although the U.S. was under attack. border. visas. and watchlists were not thought about. 
because all of the focus was on reporting and disrupting abroad with little thought for the 
connection back to the homeland. Hindsight is perfect, however. and Tenet noted that during the 
Millennium threat period everyone was doing what they could with the best of intentions, racing 
from threat to threat. 
25 
~This was particularly salient regarding the airline threat. He noted that there were x1 1ery 
good threat reports disseminated Lo FAA at this time,25X1 But 
there was no mechanism in place to forcibly close the security loopholes on the domestic front. 
This was despite the fact that the Gore Commission and the Pan Am I03 disaster had provided 
evidence of the.threat from hijackings. (Zelikow noted here that the Gore Commission said 
nothing about hijacking, and Pan Am 103 was not ~vidence about hijacking)]. Tenet continued 
that there was no homeland security mechanism to take the lessons from what did 1101 happen 
and subsequently to raise defensive batTiers. [Note: Tenet noted for the record in his December 
28, 2004 imervie1,11 with the Commission that the March 2000 Principals Commiltee meeting on 
lessonsfi·om the Millennium Threat did. in/act, address homeland security issues). 
~enet observed that the Millennium threat was followed by the Cole bombings. and then the 
Ramadan threat at the end of 2000, which was another intense period. ~·You're ninning like hell" 
throughout this entire timeframe, he said, at least this was how the OCT thought of it. The 
Principals, the NSC, the CSG-all these individuals lived through these threat periods and were 
heavily involved and experienced with the threat they faced. Tenet again observed that~ unless 
you live through it you do not know what you are talking about. 
Working with the FBI 
-(,Gt-During the Millennium threat period~ Tenet and Director Freeh talked on a daily basis. but 
there was. in fact.. nothing categorically different about this period in tenns of the CIA-FBI 
relationship. Freeh and Tenet sat down with the Gang of Eight at least once a month to review 
intelligence priorities, including counterintelligence and counterterrorism-there was top-level 
interaction between CIA and the Bureau. On a working level, CIA and FBI worked specific 
cases overseas, such as the Kansi rendition. and when the FBI expanded overseas there were 
TOP SECRET25X1 NF 
19 
=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
• • • •• • • 
r. 25X1TOP SECR ...T. '\ff 
. 25X1meetings in order to understand each other· s roles and 
different cultures. 
--f{;+-Thc iron-clad wall between intelligence and law enforcement was a large impediment. 
however. Limitations on the CIA-FBI working relationship included the fact that the Bureau had 
no CT headquarters (but mn their CT efforts out of their New York headquarters). and the FBI 
lacked reports officers. the ability to link cases, spot trends and do analyses, and did not 
digseminate·intelligcncc. There were also cultural issues between intelligence and law 
enforcement. and this wall also existed within FBr. In Tenet's opinion, the SONY is the body 
that \.Vas really running terrorism. 
~hat being said, there was direct contact between FBI and C[A at senior and personal levels, 
and they were working together within the U.S. (although there was uneven cooperation there), 
25X1 It was hard to 
access FBrs 302s, and Tenet said that he may have been involved episodically in trying to 
address this problem. (According to Bonk, the 302 issue would have been worked at Bonk.,s 
level on a case by case basis). There were. of course. always limitations on what C[A could 
obtain from the Bureau, but "within the system we lived in .." there was steady progress. 
Working with NSA 
~Tenet noted that NSA would complain that it was not receiving CIA 's operational traffic; 
but he said that no one brought lo his attention complaints from CTC about non-disseminated 
NSA material. [711is was in reference to the complaint made by C/Alec At/ike Scheuer that NSA 
was nnt responding to CTC's requests/or raw SIG/NT]. For thest: kinds of issues to be resolved 
by the DCI, Tenet noted that they have to be put on the DCI's table. If Tenet did in fact tell his 
DDCI General Gordon to "take care of it", he said that he just assumed that it was taken care of. 
He does not recall any conversations with Director of NSA Mike Hayden about this. The 
problem was fixed after 9-1 l (or possibly earlier, according to Rousseau). [Rousseau noted that 
lxi~uJd r~~~~~~~ tM~ !~~u~ ~~r th~ ~o~~-~si?~ l. ~ccordi~g t~. ~o~~:~ ~~1-~z:, • • . ~ 
!.I_;_~(l:'.:}:Ai_t.1.1_~,~~-~\t'"ll11~~j(l:,;;
1
<'?f_~fi;;rfz '·••· -~1ti&1iyir:./' :,-\l)ft}]~_~_·?t 
- - . - ~--._:;.-_·-,-_!"~. • •• - ..·~--~~ :·_ .... - .... 
~Overall, Tenet described the CIA's relationship with NSA as very strong throughout the 
pre-9-11 period. 2SX1 
25X1 
25 1 X and there were only ·•minor pc1turbations·· in the relationship. Ou Scheuer·s 
problem with NSA,25X1 . 
25X1 and noted that there is clearly a NSA side to the story. 
TOP SECRET25X1 NF 
20 
=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
TOP ~!13CRET.25X1 
Collection and Management Authority 
-tf=t-Was there a community-wide collection straLegy against the terrorism target? Tenet directed 
the Commission t0 talk with ADCI/C Charlie Allen, who carried oul an IC collection strategy in 
accordance with Tenefs directive in the December 1998 ·we are at war' memo. According to 
Tenet, Allen was attacking the prohlem of community collection every day since I 999. and 
Tenet believes that Allen had both the necessary clout and authority. and gm the responses he 
needed from the fC. 
-terfhere is bigger piece of this strategy, for example language capability. Tenet noted that 
there was no programmatic concept at CIA to support building language capability, but a 
language program has now been built into recruitment and training, with incentives for 
maintaining language capabilities and building language skills. This programmatic approach 
was adopted at CIA and then shared with the rest of the IC. and is now in place-but he 
acknowledged that "we were late.~~ 
""t€:tr\sked whether he thought that the DCI has sufficient management authority over the IC, 
Tenet wished to reserve his comments for the tinure so that he could provide thoughtful input. 
He did say~ however, that he was not in favor of the creation of a Director for National 
Intelligence (DNI). arguing that by s~paraling the DNI from operators and analysts, the DNI is 
powerless and you will instead have merely a figurehead that does not do much. 
~Tenet added that there is a meeting in the DCI Conference Room at 5pm five days a week, 
with DIA. FBI. NSA. the Terrorist Threat Integration Center (TTIC), the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS)1 the Information Operations Center (IOC)-"everyone is there.~, In 
Tenet's opinion, it is the most important meeting in Washington, and all major issues are 
discussed. • 
Concluding Comments 
~Tenet noted that on the CT issUt:s, he is cun·ently acting on autopilot: he does not need a lot 
of policymakers' time in order for him to do his job, he simply keeps the Principals informed 
(and he added that the continuity of Lhe CSG is useful in this respl!ct). But the problem with the 
issue is. "unless you live it, you don't know it.'~ He explained that before 9-11 there were 
sometimes questions as to whether the threat warnings were disinformation, but for those who 
lived with this issue there was an intuitive, gut feeling that told them that this was not deception. 
This insight is a result of having spent time on the target.. and Tenet said that, unfortunately, a 
new set of policymakers had to live the threat in the worst possible way. 
~enet himself has made a personal choice to become extremely involved in the terrorist issue 
on an operational level, giving him hoth the high-level and the low-le·vel pl!rspective. 25X1 
25X1 
isx1 Working on CT demands a lot of time, and it is impo11ant to 
choose the right people and put t.hem in the right places, since the rest of the IC works off of 
what CIA does~ (Tenet noted that ••'central= means something in this context"). 
TOP SF.GRl!:T.'25X1 NF 
21 
=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
TOP SECRE:r25X1 NF 
-fGt-According to Ten~t, the PA TRJOT Act has been the single best thing that has happened~ 
giving the IC very powerfol tools that it did not have before. In hindsight, he noted that the [C 
probably did not sit down after the Millennium threat experience and think stralcgically aboul all 
the domestic issues that should have been addressed, such borders problems~ visas, wntchlists, 
tip-oft~ and so on----no one was thinking that these problems were occurring every day, despite 
the fact that the pace of events was not as elcvatc::d. 
(C)-Bonk added that, after the Millennium threat, CTC had to spend time convincing people 
25X1- that there was actually a threat and that the entire alert had not been 
a hoax-this was especially true because of the contemporaneous Y2K threa~. Tenet agre~.d. 
commenting that v; of foreign partners ··thought we were crazy'\ from 1998 onwards~?X1 
~?~~ 'where there was an attitude that ••it was not their problem:~ 25>(1 • • 
25X1 • - • •• • Tenet noted that-th1s altitude ·was 
a little like, ~-it it docsn~t l1appen to you, it doesn'fcount." 
TOP SCCRET 25X1 NF 
22 
=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
25 1TOP SECRET X NF 
Issues that DCI Tenet <lid not recall andior said he would look up: 
25 1(1) Whether the U.S. did not retHliate at1er Khobar Towers X
25X1 
(2) Whether UBL 's possible connection to the OPM/SANG bombing was investigated. 
(3) 25X1 
(4) 
(5) The circumstances surrounding 25X1 refusal to give the CIA access to al Qaeda 
25X1 
(6) Why the tannery was taken off of the 1998 retaliatory targets list. 
(7) Did DCI Tenet participate in debates regarding military strike options after the retaliaLion 
for the East African embassy bombings. 
{8) The sequence of events as to when Dick Clarke called the UAE about the possible strike 
near the hunting camp, and whether DCI Tenet specifically or CIA generally cleared the 
call before it happened. 
(9) CIA's transmittal letter and internal documents 2§X~-' - _ concerning 
Liu.-: drafl MoN authorizing ··offensive operations" against tJBL, and any notes 'by DCI 
Tenet or other CIA employees reflecting what the AG's position was on this drafi. 
(J 0) Whether ClA 's request for the draft MoN authorizing "offensive operations'· against 
UBL reflect that the CIA actually had assets in place who could carry out such an 
operation. 
(11) Did the MoN with the Presidenfs handwritten edits actually help CIA? 
{12) Why the CIA did not ask foi:- authority to attack the Derunta camp. 
(13) [ssues surrounding the availability of the 25X1 and USG preparation 
for a response. 
(14) Why the U2 flight did not happen. 
(15) The story behind CIA asking for authority 25X1 
( 16) Examine the strike package regarding the May 1999 incident in which UIH. was plac~d at 
a location 25X1 
(17) Why didn"t CIA insert anyone into Afghanistan? 
(18) The nature of contacts with the Saudis ailer Clarke .. s memo of June 1999. 
(19) Two articles (PDB'!) in May-June 1999, one entitled usa_udi backsliding on terrorism'' 
2and that the Saudis had been blackmailed to send 5.~t= • • to the Taliban via UAE. 
(20) Whether DCI Tenet was an advocate of giving lethal aid to the NA so that the NA would 
go after UBL. 
(21) Whether DCI Tenet talked with Hayden about information-sharing issues between CIA 
ancl NSA25X1 
(22) Whether Scheuer's problem25X1 NSA was an isolated problem and 
how it was fixed. 
(23) Whether DC( Tenet has sufficient authority over the IC. 
10 OBTAIN FROM ClA 
TOP S:ECRET.25X1 23 
=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
25 1TOP 8ECRET X 'NF 
{l) All of the DI products 
(2) The binder done by DCI Tenet's staff to prepare him for this interview. This includes: 
a. A detailed CIA timeline 
(3) The memo by Charlie: Allen conccmiug what he had accomplished in driving collection 
after the 1998 declaration of war memorandum. 
(4) DCI Tenefs correspondence with 0MB regarding more money. 
TOP SECRET,25X1 NF 
24 