=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
TOP SECRE'f25X1 
Event: Interview of George Tenet 
Type of Event: Interview 
Date: January 28, 2004 X25 1Special Access Issues: Treat as TOP SECRET 
Additional notes: The witness was placed under oath at the start of his first interview on January 
22, 2004. At the start of this interview, he was reminded that he was still under oath 
Prepared by: Alexis Albion 
Reviewed by: Gordon Lederman 
Team Number: Three 
Location: DCI Conference Room, CIA HQs 
Participants - Non-Commission : George Tenet, CIA Chief of Staff John Moseman, CIA 
25 1General Counsel Scott Muller, Rudy Russo Ben Book. X 2 5 1 25X1 and the DCI's assistant X
Participants - Commission: Commissioner Richard Ben-Veniste, Philip Zelikow, Dan Marcus, 
Mike Hurley, Alexis Albion, Gordon Lederman 
The Kuala Lumpur (KL) Story 
tG). Tenet noted that he had not reviewed the material on this story, (and Zelikow acknowledged 
that the DCI is not a first hand witness for this episode). But the DCI observed that the good 
news about the KL story is that CIA was tracking Al Qaeda operative Khalid al Midhar. 1n 
Tenet's opinion, the Joint Inquiry's report misinterpreted all of this; there is a misconception that 
CIA and FBI were not talking to each other, but FBI was, in fact, far more aware ofthe Kuala 
Lumpur meeting than has previously been made public. If you go back and review the reporting, 
he said, it is clear that the information about the meeting did not just go to CIA but to other 
institutions as well . (Tenet added that he also thinks the Joint Inquiry exaggerated the 
importance of the New York meeting). [Zelikow noted that the Commission had evidence that 
FBT was informed of this matter by CIA, former FBI Director Freeh has briefed the Commission 
on this subject twice, and the Commission noted this in its staff statement at its January 2004 
public hearing). 
~Ultimately, the meaning ofthe KL story comes back to the watchlisting issue, and questions 
ofsystems, people, and training. Tenet asked, what is the responsibility of other institutions as 
far as watchlisting is concerned? It is, he replied, to make sure that you do not get just one bite 
ofthe apple. We now have the Terrorist Threat Integration Center and other mechanisms; but 
previously, how many people understood a lot about watchlisting issues? On an operational 
level, Tenet said that watchlisting is not foolproof in terms of stopping people with either false or 
real documents, but it did keep some people out of the country. He proposed that we need to 
have a capability throughout government such that those who read this kind oftraffic have an 
equal responsibility to make sure the appropriate people are watchlisted, and that a certain 
amount of rcdnndancy is built into the system. 
Declassified Under Authority of the lnteragency 
Security Classification Appeals Panel, 
E.O. 13526, Sec. 5.3(b)(3) ~.2sx1 
NSC-directed ISCAP Review, Document 11 
Declassification Date: September 8, 2026 
1 
NF 
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
mp SECRET26X1 . 
~Tenet noted that CIA is now reviewing every file going back 2?><}-. to see if the people 
involved in this meeting can be identified. All the agencies have been asked to create focal point 
to do the same thing, including the FBI. Tenet observed, however, that given the virtual 
environment we know work in, it is probably not realistic to think that we can catch all 
information on this issue; though CIA has pressed staff to only use fonnal, paper traffic, there is 
a lot on email that is hard to capture. 
ffS)'"Russo added two further factual points on the management of this transnational case: 1) in 
response to the finding that CIA did not look broadly enough to get information on the KL 
suspects-Le. did not ask the Natio~~.l S~curity Agency (NSA) to search its database, he 
reminded the Commission that~~f1··j;:.\jhe Agency's infonnation retrieval system, included 
_~~1~µ.1iµ~ted NSA traffic, and this._was·:fhe perspective '7IA operators had w?en t~ey queried 
~- >=~ . • · • . 2) CIA asked NSA to put M1dhar on a watchbst In other words, m their own wav~ 
CIA. \Vas-_:setting up a way to manage this case and to follow Midhar after he left KL. 25-Xt • . 2~,Ct ._ . -: ~added that, having put individuals on the NSA tipper, CIA would have been counting 
on NSA•to pass on additional undisseminated infonnation without CIA having to ask for it. 
~ Zelikow noted that the Commission's perspective on the KL story is to see it less in terms of 
a watchlisting blunder and more as a failed intelligence operation that opens a window onto 
sS;stemic problems at CIA in managing transnational operations. Tenet noted first, that there are. 
~::-~1:~~.---.,:·_:.:}):>ther intelligence operations going on simultaneously. Second, a place like the 
t!owiterterrorist Center (CTC) works on a hub and spoke concept. CIA drives resources very 
hard from the center; the hub at CTC performs traces and analysis, sometimes gives direction on 
cases, sets priorities, and drives resources to various, disparate people. But at the end of the day, 
the hub has to rely on others to inform it. The field, however, cannot be expected to absorb the 
"fire hose" of infonnation that headquarters receives, and headquarters cannot simply shoo~ the 
fire hose out to the field or officers will be flooded. There needs to a collaborative effort 
betw~en HQs and the field. Moreover, you cannot simply focus on one issue an4.11~gl.e.ct th~ ~est 
of the pie, or you are just hurting yourself in the long-run, Tenet observed. ,~1i:•_:··/·/_: .. /-.·,:--: 
added that it is not unusual for there to be a delay on receiving a response from the field, 
especially when dealing with foreign liaison). 
_($}In the absence ofa lot more staff at CTC, and given the high operational tempo at which it 
was performing in the late 1990s, Tenet acknowledged that roles and missions may have been an 
issue; it might not be expected that C/CTC Cofer Black and ClAlec Rich Blee, should remember 
every case. Instead, it was always, "on to the next thing." A decision always needs to be made 
as to which cases to manage yourself and which you let the hub and spoke deal with. In this time 
frame, Tenet said, Black and others were involving him in a lot ofcases at a detailed level of 
granularity. But Tenet does not recall the KL case being highlighted for him; the case did not 
leap out at him. 
--(q-2elikow noted that Deputy Director of Operations (DDO) Jim Pavitt had described managing 
an intelligence case by using the analogy of how the victim of a car accident is brought to the 
hospital by way of a chain of people, where an attending physician is responsible for his case 
overall. Tenet observed that, "you better make sure you have enough attendings." CIA did not 
2 
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
TOP SECRE125X1 
have enough: ''it's people-people's he issue,t' he said, adding that CIA could not recruit and 
train new people fast enough. Money is important here on the front end as a strategic 
investment, especially for handing operations overseas, but well trained people who know the 
target is the real answer. "We're building it," Tenet said, but creating a cadre of officers is 
simply one of those things that you need to work your way through. Tenet said that it was 
important to note that well-trained people are required at both HQs and in the field-if you have 
one, and not the other, the case falls flat. This tension between HQs and the field is real and live 
today. Tenet is still trying to push for more people out in the field. 
The Millennium After-Action Review 
..(CrTenet noted that he wished to correct.his statement from his earlier interview with the 
Commission (January 22, 2004) that no homeland security mechanism was part of the 
Millenniwn after-action review. The March 10th, 2000 after-action report at NSC had four issues 
on its agenda, one of which was immigration, and another US-Canadian border security. The 
meeting thus covered issues broader than simply CIA's areas of responsibility, and there was 
attention to domestic security. 
~ccording to Tenet, a four-step process was envisioned for directing more resources toward 
the Al Qaeda threat coming out of this meeting. On March lilt, Tenet met with National 
Security Adviser Sandy Berger regarding counterterrorism{CT) funding, which had been item 
number 3 on the after-action review's agenda. But asked whether CIA did in fact receive a CT 
supplemental, the DCI was himself unsure; he said that he did not recall whether a supplemental 
had actually come out of this meeting, and when he reviewed the material on this he lost the 
thread: "I don't know what happened." He did not recall if a request for a supplemental even 
moved out of CIA to downtown, and referred the Commission to the Director ofthe Office of 
Management and Budget (0MB) to find out what happened. (Bonk added here that he recalled 
::1::::i:F.il~l~r7~:ts!:;:::i~:v:;:o~r;~~::2~~f~e::t!:ft~;ft 
was his impression at the March 1 Ou, meeting, however, that all the agencies were putting their 
money needs on the table, such that "it choked the horse." How this translated into CIA's needs, 
however, he did not know. [The Commission's General Counsel, Dan Marcus, remarked that 
Team 2 's Kevin Scheid is investigating this matter at CM). 
Predator . . . , 
~~~~1 :) Tenet recalled that the~,~1:({ltrtH(,;./;program was a joint CIA-DOD (Air Force) effort, 
originating from the need for more eyes'o1i"'targets, and that Predator flew 17 times over 
Afgnanistan in 2000 in reconnaissance mode. A tall man in a white robe was spotted, and the 
DCI said that this could have been UBL,. though he also said that he had seen other images of tall 
men in white robes striding around, and there was no corroboration that this was indeed UBL. 
At the time, Tenet thought that the Predator platform clearly had enormous promise. The 
timeliness of the instrument was very interesting if it could be armed. He also noted the 
advan1age to having fusion of data all occurring in one place in real-time; from a bureaucratic 
point of view it was "one-stop shopping." 
' 3 
=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
5X1TOP SECRET2-
~ 5~1. ·1 As 2000 wound down25X.1.0.S~>' • • . precluded further UAV flights. At least by 
the autumn of 2000, Tenet remembered that a position began to emerge at CIA that Predator had 
to be weaponized before it flew again. 1 There had been at least one instance during its 
reconnaissance flights when the UAV had been videotaped by the Taliban, and from CIA's 
perspective continuing to fly recon. flights might jeopardize the possibility for using Predator in 
the armed mode. Furthermore, previous experience had shown that if a target were spotted in 
Afghanistan, it took at least an hour to spin-up the TLAMs-Tenet seemed to be implying here 
that the likelihood of using the UAV to effect a cruise missile strike was low. He added that, 
even in September 2000, the Air Force was not yet sure whether the armed UAV would work 
against the targets, in terms of the fragmentation ability of the munition to penetrate targets. 
_(TS~~?~~s:::·;, 1.l!J~t~ 799,~~ m~ i~_~u~ aros~ of whether Predator should be brought back ~~X1 
~:~~-1_ >:;/<:_··: /.:'.:_:·::·':/:'.{i\(':' ,·;,,.'>:' •.• <)Tenet thinks both he and Berger made the decision to do 
•so.• 'tenet did not recall the qu~stion ofdeploying armed Predator until his first meeting with 
National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice. 
(TS.~~~_:) Bonk recalled that impediments to further development of the Predator program 
began early on. For example, the NSC had told CIA that DOD had agreed to absorb the cost of 
any lost UAVs, but this turned out not to be the case: it was clear that DOD expected to be 
reimbursed. Funding problems were underway almost froni the very first flights over 
Afghanistan, when an extra~~~-:•::}!:-':)?.?ft? \vas needed for a Predator airframe. But 
according to Tenet, he does not think that these funding issues slowed down progress on the 
program. The DCI recalled that on July 25, 2001, he told NSC that he had to go to the Hill to 
explain to the Appropriations Committee what was behind his request for more money 
[presumably for Predator]. Bonlc added that the wrangling over money on this issue "was more 
aggravating than delaying,'' and if it was delaying it was only by days, not weeks (and this was 
also Tenet's recollection). 
~~)(f :) According to Tenet, the return of Predator,~~1Iiii:?:.(; ·-: : • :_Was delayed after the 
attacfon the Cole in case it was needed for intelligence gathering or to do a BDA for strikes on 
Afghanistan. 
Community Management: Working with DOD 
~ Regarding the DCI' s working through community management issues with the Secretary of 
Defense, Tenet said that he established the predicate before 9-11 of meeting with the Deputy 
Secretary of Defense rather than the Secretary himself, but met frequently with Deputies John 
Hamre or Rudy de Leon. Currently, the channel is directly to Secretary Rumsfeld, with whom 
he meets once every two weeks "religiously", and this is very effective. Tenet noted, however, 
that either the Secretary or Deputy's level is fine, and who he meets with depends on how 
•~~X!'• According to Book, the Air Force had a long-term program to ann UAVs after a couple ofyears. After 
CIA learned of this, the Agency started to look into the idea ofweaponization with the Air Force, to see if the 
program could be speeded up to meet CIA needs. Tiu;refore, there was a weaponization effort underway before fall 
2000, but the dmeline was beyond CIA's needs. 
·NF 
4 
=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
'fOP S:ECR:ET25X1 
responsibilities are broken up and who gets the intelligence portfolio. He added that he finds the 
new position of Undersecretary of Defense for Intelligence, currently held by Steve Cambone, to 
be very helpful because there is not a place to talk about defense intelligence issues at one place 
at the CJS level. 
-(€) Tenet recalled little about his meetings with Sec Def Rumsfeld on May 4th and July 27111 
2001m, but noted that DDCI/Community Management Joan Dempsey would have attended. 
(CIA will check to see if there are MFRs for these meetings). 
Responding to the Attack on the U.S.S. Cole 
~Tenet was not aware of any warning about the attack on the Cole in October 2000, though he 
noted that in hindsight there had been report of a coming attack on the 5th or 6th Fleet. The DCI 
said that his recollection of the CIA's investigation into the attack was entirely dependent on the 
documents in his briefing book, from which he noted that CTC's first briefing on responsibility 
for the Cole was on November 10; he presumed this was a briefing for the CSG, but is not sure. 
Reading from the slides prepared for the briefing, Tenet remarked that the findings were quite 
impressive--"it ain't bad!" It was his impression that the information in this briefing did not 
change very much thereafter. 
--teTTenet was surprised at the notion that the NSC was awaiting his conclusive judgment on 
responsibility for the Cole attack before taking action against al Qaeda. [Note: In his interview 
with the Commission, National Security Adviser Sandy Berger said that the USG was essentially 
waitingfor such ajudgmentfrom his DCI before taking responsive action]. Both Tenet and 
Moseman joked that the DCI was not "the Oracle at Delphi." He had no recollection of anyone 
telling him that there were not going to act until he delivered a judgment on responsibility. He 
simply kept bringing the NSC what the CIA had found, and briefing the same findings. 
~.Jt was Tenet's position that it was up to him to present the case, and then it was up to the 
Principals to decide if this was good enough to justify use of military force; the DCI cannot 
decide what information is "good enough" to call in the military. Tenet's response to the 
Principals who were waiting for a final word from him would have been, "the ball's in your 
court ... It's not like this stuff is getting any richer." 
-{G}-Tenet's sense was that by late November, CIA's findings were "pretty good," and that the 
intelligence was not going to get any better than that. Once N ashiri was identified as a link 
between the Cole and the East Africa Embassy bombings, it was all wrapped up, Tenet said. He 
does not think that they had much on the question of central command and control of the 
operation linking back to Afghanistan, however. 
~In hindsight, Tenet noted, "it's hard for me to believe this wasn't Bin Ladin, slam-dunk." 
But he did not recall Berger or anyone else telling him, "we're just waiting for the magic words." 
Tenet also did not remember having any conversation with Berger on the subject of 
responsibility for the Cole, any discussions on the state of evidence with either Berger or the 
President, or any discussions about retaliation for the attack. He h~d no recollection of anyone 
5 
=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
TOP SECRET25X1 
saying that the issue should be left for the new administration. Nor did he recall telling his 
officers in CTC to tamp down infonnation coming out of the Cole investigation. Tenet did not 
remember a Principals Committee meeting on December 21 st 2000, nor the account of this 
meeting given by Richard Miniter (in Losing Bin ladin: How Bill Clinton's Failure Unleashed 
Global Terror), and Zelikow's description of exchanges in the meeting rang no bells. 
The Blue Sky Memo 
(C) Tenet rec~led that the Blue Sky memo was a response to the question: what would you do 
about the problem in Afghanistan in an unstructured policy and resources environment? He does 
not recall whether he saw the memo before it went to NSC, though he thinks DDCI McLaughlin 
did. He does not remember any conversations with Berger about the memo, and believes the 
administration simply ran out of time to address the issues the memo brought up. 
The Transition 
(U) The DCI did not recall any details about the briefings he gave to incoming officials for the 
new Bush administration during the transition period. He said that DDO Pavitt has told Tenet 
that he did do these briefings, but he himself does not remember what he said. He knows that he 
did speak with President Bush for about an hour at Blair House before the inauguration (the Vice 
President and Pavitt were also present}, but again does not know what he told him, and has no 
script from the meeting. Tenet also did not recall whether or not he briefed Rice at this time. He 
noted that transitions are chaotic, turbulent periods-and added that he himself was in some 
limbo as well, waiting to find out if he would be kept on as DCI. 
-tSTTenet did not recall whether he briefed incoming officials on the status of the Cole • 
investigation, although he did note that a January 25111, 2001 PDB item did do this. He does not 
remember if he did or did not tell them about the ambitious ideas for confronting UBL that had 
been put on the table via the Blue Sky memo, nor whether the Blue Sky memo was even in his 
head at this time. He did recall that some time in January DDCI McLaughlin reviewed all the 
MONs with Rice and her deputy, Steve Hadley., and that the Blue Sky memo manifested itself 
that year in the March 2001 draft MON. He thought it would be interesting to find out what 
Dick Clarke had done about the ideas that were presented in this memo. Tenet added that there 
were briefing books for the transition (which have been provided to the Commission). 
(U) Tenet's position as DCI was clarified definitively in 2001, though not straight away. On 
January 201\ he was told something along the lines of, keep going and we'll let you know what 
happens later-we'll try this and see if it works. He does not recall there being any official 
announcement that he would continue as DCI, but simply that he kept working. 
The President,s Daily Briefings 
-tSTTenet gave dual briefings (to both Bush and Gore) for a period before the election had been 
resolved. But soon after the inauguration, President Bush made it clear that he wanted to see the 
DCI every day before the brief. This was a dramatic change from the previous administration. 
- NF 
6 
=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
TOP SECRET25X1 
As compared to President Clinton, the way President Bush absorbs data is "profoundly 
different." According to Tenet, Bush likes to receive his intelligence face-to-face, and so 
provides the DCI with opportunities for exchange and real-time feedback. The PDB ha.c; been 
overhauled to accommodate this difference, and the quality of the briefings is improving. Tenet 
noted that he has to prepare not only for the President, but for a sophisticated group of 
policymakers with previous experience of the PDBs. 
"'tfS,rl"enet had no recollection of a conversation with the President about the POD item on 
January 25th 2001. [According to Zelilcow, this PDB itemjlagged current view on responsibility 
for the Cole attack and is said to have prompted the President to ask a question about what the 
consequences might be ofkilling UBL]. He could not talk to either the content or context of the 
conversation, what he said to the President or how the President responded. Tenet did add, 
however, that he is sure that he and the President talked about UBL. 
(U) Tenet never conducted his daily briefings with the President alone. The Vice President, 
Rice, Chief ofStaff Andrew Card, and a CIA briefer (usually Mike Merrel during this period) 
were a1so present. After 9-11, Secretary of Homeland Security Tom Ridge and Director of FBI 
Robert Mueller would come to a follow-up session on homeland security. 
(U) Asked how often he had conversations with the President about the UBL threat, Tenet noted 
that it is important to remember that this was a new administration, and consequently everything 
was new. Moreover, we need to recall the pre 9-11 mindset. In the context of this period, 
everything was as important as everything else; it was a dramatic, dynmnic time. "Everything' s 
kind of up in the same place, for some period of time." 
The New Administrations' CT Policy 
~~~tJ In the first few months ofthe new administration, Tenet recalled that there were 
discussions about UBL, the Predator program, and the Taliban. From his point of view, there 
was a slow build-up on the UBL issue, with Predator as a front-door entry point for talking about 
the topic, and with the administration becoming focused on the issue in March. 
(TS~X1:· There was discussion on Predator "right out of the block." On January 24th, 2001, 
Tenet had a meeting with Rice where Predator was discussed (also overtures from Taliban 
minister Jalil); on February 7th, his discussion with Rice prompted a wider debate, so the DCI 
later brought her a series of papers to read on various aspects of the Al Qaeda problem (given to 
Rice at an early March meeting). The pressing question at the time was whether to arm the 
Northern Alliance. Tenet talked with both Powell and Rice on this topic, though he recalls 
nothing about the content of these discuss!ons .. tJie said that CIA would hunt down information 
on these Powell meetings for the Commission). 
UsingTLAMs 
~ccording to Tenet, as far as he knew the TLAM option was still on the table in 2001, 
thougl1 he added that there were no opportunities to use it. He was wiaware of opportunity after 
May 1999 when the Principals considered using TLAMs against UBL. Tenet assumes that if 
7 
=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
25 1TOP SECRET. X 
CIA had come forward with locational data qn UBL that it would have considered; after all, he 
said, Dick Clarke was still at the CSG. Although the DCI was not sure whether there was a 
protocol in place for taking a shot at UBL, his working assumption was that there would have 
been a way to do this if the data had been generated. 
The Draft MON and Finding 
-fFS)-Tenet was not aware if he had met with Rice on the subject of a draft MON and Finding on 
March 15th or 17th (and Muller added that CIA has not been able to find a MFR for this meeting). 
Nor did he recall discussing the new authorities with Rice or Hadley, though said that it was 
possible. In the back of his mind, the DCI recalled having conversations with someone at NSC 
about consolidating the existing MONs into one place-but he does not know when or with 
whom. Tenet acknowledged that it was entirely possible that, having been asked to consolidate 
the MONs, CIA interpreted this as an opportunity to write a clearer document; since no new 
Finding had been written since 1986, "it was not inconceivable that our guys said, let's run this 
down and see how it flies." That being said, Tenet said he did not know how this all originated, 
but noted, ''it doesn't just come out of the ether." He does have the paper that came to him from 
CIA's Executive Director on the tasking for the MON and Finding, however. 
5 1~ ~ . ·• Bonk recalled CIA raising issues in early 200 I as to what the administration's CT 
policy was going to be. A tasking came from downtown for what would become the policy 
background paper to allow the poiicymakers to discuss CT issues. He remembered sitting down 
with CTC/Legal 's 25X1 .• •. •· . • • . and deciding that they would put everything into this new 
document and see what happened. Bonk said that he never saw their tasking as consolidating 
previous MONs. Similarly, Moseman noted that he felt CIA had had a series of"mother may I 
documents", and that this was a way around them-a way to get away from the 'mother may I' 
and narrow approach of the previous MONs. This new MON would be worldwide. The 
document needed to authorize direct kill authority in order to make use of anned Predator, Bonlc 
noted. (Moseman agreed with this reading of what authority the MON was looking for). 
(TS) Tenet himself did not review the new authorities before handing them over to NSC. 
Reading the cover note to the MON and Finding written by EXDIR Krongard (from his briefing 
binder), Tenet observed that the note said this was an expansion of CIA, s authorities, as well as 
registering that the preparation of these documents was backwards (that CIA should not be 
driving a policy initiative but responding to one). Tenet did not know what happened to the 
MON and Finding after March 2001. But he believes they were subsumed into the policy 
process taking place through the spring and summer of 2001, so that the new administration 
could work out where they wanted to come out in all of this. 
Predator 
(-i:s:25X,:W Tenet said the question of whether to fly reconnaissance or weaponized U:AV flights 
over Afghanistan went on for a long time, anticipating a policy decision. The CIA favored the 
anned option, but according to Tenet it was the Afr Force's assessment that the weaponized 
UA V was not yet ready to fly in early 2001 because of technical issues: the airframe needed to 
be modified, and weapons had to be tested. According to Bonk, weapons' demonstrations were 
underway, though not a full test schedule, and all showed that if armed Predator was to fly its use 
TOP SBGRST25X1 NF 
8 
=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
'fOP SeCRET2SX1 
1fi¥11ge verv constrained. 25X ' x4 
2 . ,t, ·.. 
25X1:. x4 • The opportwuties to use armed Predator at this point were "incredibly 
small," Bonk said. TableMtop exercises were going on, and a concept of operations being 
developed simultaneously as testing proceeded, but Predator was still not ready to fly. Tenet's 
impression was that the development of the anned UA V was not slowed down by arugments 
over money or anything else. 
~ 5X1 ) On the issue of command and control of armed Predator, Tenet noted that "this was 
new ground." There were a number of legitimate questions that needed to be answered by the 
policymakers: What is the chain of command? Who takes the shot? Are you comfortable with 
CIA doing this? Do you understand that this is not something that the CIA is usually asked to 
do, and if so, then you are going outside of the normal military command and control procedure? 
Bonlc said that the process of trying to get answers to these questions began in 2000 after the first 
Predator flights, but started to heat up in the spring and summer of 2001. These sorts of issues 
were built into the March 2001 draft MON. 
-crs25X1 ) At the same time, ADCI/MS General Campbell was leading an effort to work out 
what level of confidence would be necessary in order to use anned Predator to talce a shot at 
UBL. He developed a list of criteria. This was going on while technical and authority issues 
were ·all being resolved. 
(TS) Tenet had no recollection of whether Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld was supportive of the 
Predator project or not, though he said that Rumsfeld's position was no obstacle to him and 
never pushed back saying this should be a military issue. 
Funding 25X1 , 
~Tenet noted that a figure of • • • for offensive operations was mentioned at his May 29th 
2001 meeting with Rice, also attended by both Clarke and Black. (He thought this figure 
probably reflected calculations coming out of the March 15th 2000 after action Millennium 
review rather than from the Blue Sky memo). According to Tenet, a transition report by Rich 
Haver told the administration all about CIA's money problems, and led to a more than 15% 
increase from the previous year for the FY 2002 budget, (though noting that the initial FY 2002 
budget was inherited from the Clinton administration). What was different here was that 
increased funding for CIA was done through a bu,et submission,2?X1 < . · . 
and that this money therefore went right to CIA ~j··t: . Tenet praised the Bush administration 
on this issue: "They got the money story cold. Cold.,, 
The Summer of Threat 
{S).Ienet said that CIA was finding threat reporting "worrisome" by late.May, 2001. On July 
10th , he briefed Rice, telling her that she had to hear the reporting that was coming in indicating 
that a significant terrorist attack was coming in weeks or months. The nature of25X1 •l 
reporting was very disturbing, he told Rice, suggesting an Olympic-sized attack, while 
simultaneously HUMINT was saying there would be multiple attacks with many casualties. "In 
9 
TOP SECR.ET.25Xt NF 
=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
fOP SECR:ET.25x1 
our world, the system was blinking red," Tenet explained, and by late July, "it doesn't get any 
worse than that." 
-t87 Given the context, the DCI's attention quickly shifted to 'Millennium threat mode', engaging 
with foreign liaison and disruption operations around the world. During the summer., there was a 
ton of activity, including CSGs and FAA advisories. There were~~ possible overseas targets, 
25 1 and CIA thwarted threats to US Embassies X The CIA was clearly on top of 
things overseas, Tenet said, "because that's what we're supposed to do." He noted that 
throughout the threat period the focus was almost exclusively overseas based on the reporting 
CIA was receiving. 
~ By the ~a~e July/early August period, intelli~ence suggested that w;hatever terroris~ activity 
had been on~mallv planned had been delayed. 5~1 . .. • .. • . -· _ .. · 
25X1. •.· . • • . • 
was 
. • . .• • .•• • There was a feeling of great frustration at the Agency at 
that tfrne: an attack delayed, but no one knew where it was going; there was a sense that the 
attack might be coming to the United States, but no one knew for sure. According to Tenet, what 
had been planned was a m~j(?r Al Qaeda attack on U_.S. interests; he thought it was possible that 
the spectacular attack 2~X1- • • .c ; ' • .• . • :':. : . • , • · ·,.:.: In 
2retrospect, the DCI said he is quite confident that.CIA's ~,C.1:. · :tTorts overseas did in fact 
delay terrorist activities. 
--ES)-2~>:Ct • • .. . noted that, after September 11th, CTC looked back to see if any of the 
information CiA. was picking up during the summer of 2001 related to the 9-11 attacks, and 
concluded _tµa~. ~t .was a separate and unrelated stream of intelligence-though it w~s possible that 
some i~~1<·<. <·'i\/ • was related to the murder of Northern Alliance leader Masood. According 
to Russo, at this time UBL and others were talking about an attack coming, possibly related to 9-
11. But although the 9-1 I plot was in fact delayed on July 8th, this was not because ofCIA's 
disruption efforts; instead, the planning went at Mohammed Atta's tempo and the attack was 
shifted to a time after the Congressional recess. 
-(Grit was Tenet's view that during the summer threat period the policy machinery worked in a 
rather orderly fashion. He noted that the principle relationship he worked with was between CIA 
and FBI, and that-having lived through this kind of experience before-no one needed to tell 
him what to do. Yes, the threat was managed differently, he said, but so what? He did not know 
whether it might have been more fruitful for the Principals to have met on the issue as they did 
during the Millennium threat period, or whether, for example, the Attorney General's greater 
involvement would have made a difference, noting that he cannot compare and contrast like that. 
Tenet's sense was that officials at the White House had the sense of urgency that he intended to 
communicate to them, and understood wliat the DCI was going through. In living through this 
unique experience, Tenet's only recollection is that we were doing everything we knew how to 
do, pushing all the buttons. "Now you're asking me, ifl went to another meeting would it have 
made a difference?" Tenet said, adding, "this is painful...! don't know.'.' He added that, in 
hindsight, one could say that if someone had done a credit card check on one of the hijackers we 
would caught the terrorists, but noted that you did not need a Principal to do this. Overall, Tenet 
said that he did not know what more the Principals could have done for him. 
10 
TOP SsCRET2SX1 NF 
=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
TOP SECRET25X1 
The September 4th 2001 Principals Committee Meeting • 
-ff9'25X1 , Tenet believed that the technical judgment at the September 4th Principals' meeting 
with regard to the armed Predator program may have been that the armed capability was not yet 
ready. He recalled that a decision was made to go forward with the weaponized UAV 25X1 
25~1 . • :· • .. • • ·. • • . "and we'll figure it out when we get there." This was 
also· Book's recollection, who added that permission to fly the UAVs still needed to be obtained 
25X1 - •• > . • • _ [Note: Bonk was not present at the September 411' meeting]. 
-{TS2i~1- t The context for this decision, Tenet noted, was that he was really trying to force the 
question of command and control for anned Predator in a very tough way. Tenet said that he 
was intentionally provocative with this issue at the meeting. He put the limitations of the DCrs 
role on the table and emphasized the fact that putting military strike authority in the DCI's hands 
was something very new, "out of the realm of what we normally do for a living ... not normal 
business,n said Tenet, telling the Principals that he was perfectly willing to do it, "but you need 
to get your minds around this." In his opinion, the Principals took this all very seriously, and 
"we were moving forward." No decision was made on the question of who fired the armed 
UAV, however. 
(TS25X1 ) Tenet made clear that, in his own mind-though this was different from the 
institutional view of CTC-he did not see a real difference between flying Predator in the 
reconnaissance--only mode or flying it weaponized. After all, reconnaissance was going to be 
necessary if the armed UAV was to be used. In this sense, Tenet said he was never really against 
reconnaissance flights. 
(U) Tenet did not recall his September 5th meeting with Rice, and there appears to be no memo 
capturing the meeting. 
ANewMON 
-{TS,25X1,-t Tenet could say little about Hadley's September 10th, 2001 memo to him requesting a 
new MON. He can only guess that the request was the culmination of decision-making from all 
the Deputies' Committees. The process was working the way it was supposed to, he surmised: 
having come to a policy conclusion, and having approved a draft NSPD, the NSC was now 
coming back to CIA to formally draw up new authorities. Tenet did not know why the memo 
did not refer to the earlier draft MON that CIA had prepared in March, and he did not recall what 
he thought of the memo at the time. (Moseman noted that the DCI may not have received the 
memo until the following day). He has no recollection of having had any side conversations 
with either Rice or Hadley about this matter. Tenet noted, however, that Annex A (the covert 
action annex to the NSPD, the ideas from were to be embodied in the new MON) was floating 
around at CIA in mid-July; he remembered both Black and Clarke talking about making 
modifications to it at the time. 
Moussaoui 
~fenet recalled hearing about the arrest of Zacarias Moussaoui in August in the context of the 
daily UBL update. He was not aware of exactly when CIA learned of the arrest, but thinks that 
there was no known connection with Al Qaeda at this point, only the basic information that he 
TOP 8ECRET2~X1 NF 
11 
=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
TOP SECRBT25X1 
was a French citizen and Islamic extremist. 25X1 
25X~ •. · . • . • : 
2~X1 •. Russo noted that the sequence of 
events for this case (what CIA knew when) can be documented, and CIA will go back recreate 
this story for the Commission. 
Managing Today's CT Intelligence Effort: Lessons Learned and Recommendations 
i€1 In terms of time and attention spent on the Al Qaeda threat, Tenet thought he was not doing 
his job very differently now than before 9-11. Currently, however, there are bigger actors on the 
scene, namely CENTCOM and Special Operations Command, making for a very different set of 
, relationships between CIA and the military. Being able to cooperate with another partner, with 
sizeable capability, is a major contrast to CIA's pre-9-11 effort. 
~The Intelli~enoe Community now has a v~rt robust ~alytical effort~ and collection process 
1s much more integrated. There is synergy 25f . . . .·. . · . · . and a lot more data 
is coming in, due not only to the provisions of the PATRIOT Act but also to the fact that more 
people are now in the fight. Overall the increase in funds has given the Intelligence Community 
enormous impetus in its CT efforts. Tenet said that there is also a difference in the scope of 
CIA's relationship with the FBI. The Agency is involved injoi,nt operations with the Bureau, 
and eaeh offers more support for the others' operations. ''It's all bigger/' Tenet observed. A 
much bigger cadre of people is now working the CT problem, and this includes 25~1 • 
(whose efforts have also been ramped up, there being more money available). 
--(Gt-According to Tenet, it is the DCI who drives this new, increased CT effort. "All the moving 
parts are here (at CIA]," he noted, and the knowledge ofthe target at CIA surpasses that of all 
others. The Agency is both the operational and analytic driver ofthe CT war. Tenet pointed to 
the daily 5 pm meeting in the DCI' s conference room as an example: this is a large, interagency 
meeting chaired by the DCI, where the discussion centers on what the USG is doing in the 
Global War on Terror, what we are doing operationally tomorrow, and this includes joint 
planning with SOCOM and CENTCOM. For Tenet, "the management moral ofthe story is: 
whoever sits in this chair is going to be in the middle of it for the rest of their lives." 
The Terrorist Threat Integration Center ITTIC) 
~TTIC is where the threat matrix is now briefed (previously, this was done at the 5 o'clock 
meetings); although TIIC's primary responsibility is to relate threat information to the 
Department of Homeland Security (DHS), it must also be informed about what CIA is doing 
operationally. According to Tenet, no one wanted to be in charge ofTIIC originally; the DCI 
said he would talce it, but in that case "I own it." CIA has the methodology, training, and 
experience to make sure TIIC's analytical quality is up to standard, Tenet said. It is FBI 
Director Mueller's job to make sure the domestic piece ofITIC works properly. 
~Eventually, TTIC will need to build a new information architecture so that infonnation from 
different agencies can be synthesized. TTIC will then sit astride both CIA' s CTC and FBI's 
12 
- ·•• •. . . ··-······ •• ···- -·-----------
=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
TOP SECltET,25X1 
Counterterrorism Division (CTD), as the overriding threat analyzer. The domestic-foreign 
divide will come down in TTIC, according to Tenet; FBI Mueller has said there is nothing at FBI 
that TTIC will not be able to see, and Tenet sees TTIC as having the responsibility to be 
intimately knowledgeable about what CIA does. 25X1 • . . . . . .. 25X1 -.,: • "This is not hard to slice," said Tenet, so that everyone feels that their turf is 
protected. 
--fG1 In Tenet's opinion, TTIC will also have to task collection. Just as the DCI has a foreign 
intelligence requirements process, laying out priorities, Tenet noted that the USG needs this 
capacity for domestic collection as well. Presently, there is no set of domestic intelligence 
requirements to drive priorities, and no dissemination or sharing capability. "Before you get 
transnational," Tenet said, "you need to focus on fundamentals." The USG needs a centralized 
management structure for information to come in easily and naturally, and a center where a 
broad, synoptic view of what is going on in the U.S. can be pieced together. (Tenet noted that 
Director Mueller apparently has such a model in the works). 
~enet is confident that TTIC is going to get the job done properly-though it will need 
constant "pinging." John Brennan, who Tenet appointed to direct TflC, is someone he is close 
to and who has walk-in rights to both the DCI and the Director of FBI. 
Organizing for the Global War on Terror 
(U) Tenet was questioned on his views of the current, bifurcated interagency process for 
handling CT policy-the division between the NSC and Office of Homeland Security. His 
response was that he did not care. "You build it, we'll show up," was Tenet's attitude, "I don't 
worry about that stuff." Tenet said he bas not focused on whether the system should be 
structured differently, but will think about it. He does not believe this is a turf issue. 
-(et-It is imperative, however, to educate people about what the threat means, something that 
Tenet thinks is currently not well understood. We need to know that there is an enemy out there 
with a known, strategic targeting doctrine, and to apply this awareness to ongoing operations 
against the enemy rather than racing from threat to threat. Tenet stressed the fact that there needs 
to be an understanding that '~ust because it didn't happen doesn't mean it isn't real" or that we 
should not do more to protect an infrastructure that has been a suspected target, because, he 
noted, ''they always come back to it." Overall, the threat is not about any one place or 
individual, Tenet observed, and people need to understand that it is not going away, it is not 
going to change: it will be with us for the next 20 years. 
~This is most true for urban areas, where terrorist operatives can hide and therefore have 
operational advantages. Tenet pointed toward the need for prioritizing threats, and getting away 
from the red, orange and yellow threat indicator levels. DHS is improving, Tenet said, but the 
department needs to improve even more, and become more seamless and more sectorial in its 
focus. Moreover, we need to reach a point where there is constant talk and education about the 
threat. There are hundreds of collectors out there, Tenet noted, and we need to given them a set 
of requirements, and data-this information does not need to be top secret but simply along the 
lines of: here's what you need to look for. 
TOP S~C&En:25X1: • NF 
13 