=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
- . .J-
( 
/ ) l ,,; ,·~ r " ,. ! 
Event: Meeting with DCI Tenet ! 
Type of Event: Lwicheon Meeting 
........ '
Date: December 23, 2003 
•!,I I
Prepared by: Chris Kojm 
Reviewed by: Philip Zelikow 
Location: CIA HQ 
Participants - non-Commission: Deputy DCI John McLaughlin, Chief of Staff John 
Moseman, General Counsel Scott Muller, DCI Review Group Chief Rudy Rousseau 
Commission participants .. Commissioners Kean & Hamilton; Philip Zelikow, Chris 
Kojm. 
Chairman Kean began by thanking the DCI for the cooperation the Commission has 
received to date. 
 i • 
 I
, 1' ·-
' .. •
Detainees. The Chair and Vice-Chair said that the Commission was satisfied with the 
quality ofinfonnation they had received for almost all of the detainees. However, there 
were seven individuals so central to the plot that the Commission might need to question 
them directly. The DCI's answer was no. He said that the interrogation process cannot 
at this point introduce new faces into the process, disrupting efforts to gather intelligence 
of current value. He had checked with his best professionals on this issue and they had 
strongly urged him not to grant such access. Perhaps someday it would be possible to 
allow access to the detainees, but that time was not soon and not predictable as to when it 
would be. · The location of a few detainees was so sensitive that only three people knew 
where they were. Even the President did not know. The Chair stressed the importance of 
the Commission's mandate. The DCI conceded that this was a very difficult problem, but 
his position was finn. 
The DCI did offer that "ifwe can get your questions, we will make sure they get asked." 
Rousseau mentioned that the current plan was to return to 9/11-related questions with a 
large set of qu~tions, including those already suggested by the Commission, that would 
be posed to the detainees in early January. Both the DCI and the DDCI observed that. 
analysts who are substantive experts have asked the detainees questions. In reply, 
Z'elikow contended that the Commission had the comparative advantage ofhaving people 
who were experts in the 9/11 plot, which the Agency had conceded they were not using 
for the interrogations. The Commission also had people who were familiar with 
information from all sources - both FBI and CIA. 
The DCI said he was willing to do everything he could short of "physical access.,, He 
said, "We will move heaven and earth to get the right persons to ask the right questions. I 
will do anything and everything to get you 99.9 percent of wh~t you need." He offered to 
have Commission staff meet with CIA questioners, analysts or interrogators, to provide 
the nuances of the Commission
11
s proposed questions. The Vice Chair said that he had 
expected the DCI to turn down this request Zelikow interjected, "At least for today." 
Declassified Under Authority of the lnteragency ! 
Security Classification Appeal Panel, ; 
E.O. 13526, sec. 5.3(b){3) l 
N~C-directed ISCAP Review, Document 9 
Declassification Date: September 8, 2026 
··-·· -·••-. ·----- .. 
=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
The Vice Chair said the Commission needed at least to talce up the DCI's invitation and 
see what could be accomplished. 
Document Requests. The DCI agreed to a process of immediate review of outstanding 
document requests, under the guidance of John Moseman and Scott Muller, with the goal 
of completing all outstanding document requests. The Vice Chair underscored the 
importance of setting specific dates for remaining document production, and certifying 
completion of document production. General Counsel Muller stated that the purpose of 
such a review would be precisely that, to set dates for the production of all outstanding 
documents. He agreed that the CIA would also be able to certify a good faith effort to 
produce all responsive documents. 
The DCI made several observations: He noted that he. had a 130 page docwnent that had 
been readied in preparation for his public testimony, and that he would provide those 
materials to the Commission. He noted that he had sent some 3 to 5 letters to other 
agency principals on the topic of terrorism. Moseman added that these documents would 
be provided to the Commission shortly. The DCI noted that records of many periods 
would be sparse, became ofthe fast pace of events, with many meetings conducted by 
SVTS, especially in the run-up to the Millenium. 
Resources. The Vice Chair and Zelikow explained the Commission's interest in very 
detailed briefinis on the issues ofcounterterrorism funding and staffing. Zelikow 
suggested25X1 >r Mary Corrado as POCs on this topic for the Commission. 
The DCI agreeo enmus1astically to work with the Commission on budget issues, but did 
not sp~ifically name a POC. The DCI warned tha!~dget exercises could be deceptive; 
resources devoted to fighting al Qaeda were not the1 people in Alec Station, but the 
worldwide resources devoted to supporting them. Toe DCI also npted that the extensive 
efforts since 1996 to rebuild the CIA's HUMINT capability were an important part of 
counterterrorism expenditures. 
Congressional Oversight. The Vice Chair asked the DCI for his views on congressional 
oversight, noting that the Commission very much wanted to hear from him on what needs 
to be done to make things work better, and was interested in recommendations that are 
feasible. The DCI observed that an espt,eially telling indicator of oversight was to taliy 
the number of relevant hearings. The congressional intelligence committees had held 
very few hearings on terrorism before 9/11. The DCI had more views on oversight that 
he would be prepared to provide at a later date. 
Reflecting on the overwhelming attention that, before 9/11, had been given to threats 
against American interests overs~, the DCI observed that there were two key landmarks 
on terrorism. that he wishes he had paid greater attention to at the time: the 1993 bombing 
of the World Trade Center, and theMilleniwn incident involving Ahmed Ressam. He 
said the President was absolutely rivc:lcd when Cofer Black predicted that there could be 
S to l 5 terrorist attacks in the United States. [To Zelikow the DCI appeared to be 
recounting ~ episode involving President Bush in th~ summer of 2001; to Kojm the DCI 
appeared to be referring to a briefing of President Clinton at the end of 1999 at the time 
2 
=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
~-----• ----.--------•--- • •• __ .. _..__ ____ ,.... _ __..._•U--------·--• ._ ____ .. 
ofthe Millenimn alerts.] The DCI said the Community raced from threat to threat. Its 
operational orientation meant that there was little reflection on the historical pattern that 
could have provided better warning. 
The DCI stated further that the IC saw lots oftalk in July and August 2001 about an 
upcoming spectacular terrorist event - a "Hiroshima,, -- but was unable to place its 
location. Some said, ''They're coming here.'' But there were no data, no information 
coming back about domestic threats. The DCI stated with great conviction that there 
needed to be much more interaction between intelligence and law enforcement: "Every 
cop on the beat needs to know what we know." He said national police chiefs should be 
brought to the CIA every quarter for a briefing on terrorism. The CIA has a unique 
relationship with the NYPD; the fonner Deputy Director ofOperatfons David Cohen 
works for the NYPD and runs an intelligence shop with 800 officers who operate like 
intelligence analysts. He and his staffobserved that DHS has come a long way this past 
year and that its work in response to this weekend's 'Orange' alert was "pretty 
impressive," including its lash-up with the US military. • 
Declassification/pre-publication review. Discussion turned to classification issues in 
the preparation ofthe Commission's report. Moseman strongly criticized the Joint 
Inquiry for writing a report classified at the Top Secret/Codeword level, without any 
citation to sources, and then simply asking the intelligence community to declassify it 
He noted that the right way to write was to prepare an unclassified draft, with as much 
supporting documentation and citation ofunderlying sources as possible. This would 
enhance the ability ofthe Community to provide a rapid response in pre-publication 
review. Moseman and Muller offered to meet with Commission staffat an.early date on 
protocols to help make such aprocess work. The DCI and Moseman also emphasized the 
importance ofclose coordination with the NSC and the White House. 
Zeh1cow commented that the key was to get high-level policy decisions on what could 
safely be disclosed to the American public by the middle of2004. The original 
classification ofdata would constrain working-level officials. Only those at the top could 
establish the 'red lines' that now should apply to matters like infumiation from detainees­
or the policy story on issues like the Predator. The DCI agreed on the importance of 
high-level policy decisions to declassify categories ofmaterials and address the degree or 
extent ofcontinued sensitivity for topics such as these. 
DCI Interview and testimony. The DCI asked for early infonnation as to what the 
Commission would seek to ask him abQut in his interview and public testimony. The 
Vice Chair assured the DCI that the Commission's intent was not to play "gotcha," that 
the Commission would provide sufficient notice ofthe general topic areas so that the DCI 
would be able to make the interviews productive and give the Commission the 
information it needs. On procedures, there would be an interview on classified topics, led 
by staff with participation by c.ommissioners. Several commissioners were likely to 
attend. Thero would thou. be a public hearin& in March. 
3 